[^CORPUS OF EARLY ENGLISH CORRESPONDENCE SAMPLER
                      CEECS
(C) SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND LANGUAGE HISTORY PROJECT TEAM
                         1998
                  DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH
                  UNIVERSITY OF HELSINKI^]
<B ORIGINA1>

[^ORIGINAL LETTERS, ILLUSTRATIVE OF ENGLISH HISTORY; INCLUDING
NUMEROUS ROYAL LETTERS: FROM AUTOGRAPHS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM,
AND ONE OR TWO OTHER COLLECTIONS. VOL I. 2ND EDITION. ED. BY
ELLIS, HENRY. LONDON: HARDING, TRIPHOOK, AND LEPARD. 1825.^]

<Q OR1 1418? HCHICHELE>
<A HENRY CHICHELE>
<G M>
<P 3>
[} [\LETTER II. ARCHBISHOP CHICHELE TO KING HENRY THE FIFTH.\]
}]
   Sovereyn Lord, after moost humble recommendacion with hele
bothe of body and of sowle, as zour selfe
<P 4>
and alle zour liege men desire, lyke zow to wyte that the first
Soneday of Lenton the dwk of Excester zour huncle sent for me to
the Frer Prechours, wer I fond with him zour preest and bedeman
Thomas Fyshborn, and ther he tok to me zour Lettre wryten with
zour owne hond in zour hoost be fore zour town of Faleys, be the
wich I undirstood, as I have at alle tymes, blessud be Almyzty
God, understonde, that a mong alle zour moost wordly occupacions
that any Prince may have in herthe, ze desire principaly
vertuous lyvyng and zour sowle heele; and for as myche as my
brother of Seint David as was zour confessour is in his best
tyme go to God, ze desire that I shold be the avys of zour uncle
a forseyd send zou in his stede a gode man an a clerk of
divinite to ocupie that offis til zour comyng into zour lond of
ynglond. And whan I hadde red zour honurable letter zour uncle a
forseyd seyd to me that he hadde comunyd with Sir Thomas
Fyschborn a forseyd be zour comaundement of this same matier,
and whow it semed to hym, if it lyked me, that Thomas Dyss a
frer prechour, mayster of divinite of the scole of Caumbrygge,
wer a good man and a sufficient ther to, and whow thei hadde
comunid with him ther offe, and al so with frere John Tylle the
provincial of the same Ordre ther offe; and considereng his good
name and fame as wel in good
<P 5>
and honest lyvyng as in clergie, I assentyd in to the same
persone, and so comuned with hym ther offe, and toold him owre
comun avis; and he hath ziven his assent ther to and ordeyneth
hym in alle hast to come to zour presence, so that I hop he
schal be with zou at the same tyme that zour chapel schal come:
and be the grace of God ze schol fynde hym a good man and a
spirituel, and pleyn to zu with owte feyntese. Forthermore
towchyng that ze desire to have licence to chese zou a confessor
&c. I sende zu a letter ther offe a seelyd undir my seel, with
sufficient power to do in that caas al that I myzt do my self in
caas I wer my self in zour roial presence. Towchyng al odr
things, I wol wel my lord your brother sendyth to zu pleynlych:
and ther fore undir zour Grace it semeth to me no more to vexe
zour Hygnesse with myche redyng: prayeng ever almyzty God suych
speed to graunt zou on zour moest ryal Journe that may be to his
plesaunce, and hasty perfourmeng of zour blessud entent, and
pees to cristen pepul. Amen. Wryten at Lamhyth xvj day of Febr.
   zour preest and bedeman
   H.C.

<Q OR1 1420 RWATERTON>
<A ROBERT WATERTON>
<G M>
<P 6>
[} [\LETTER III. ROBERT WATERTON TO KING HENRY THE FIFTH.\] }]
   Ryght excellent hegh and ryght myghty Prynce, and most dredde
sovereyne Lorde I recomaunde me to zour heghnes als lowely as
any symple trewe liege man and sugette kan best thynke or
devyse, thankyng all myghty God of zour graciouse spede and
right grete conquest wyth the prosperite of zour awne persone,
my lorde of Clarence, my lorde of Exetre, and all my lordes
beyng there in zour worshipfull servyce, wyth all the remenaunt
of zour right worshipfull oste. Os I have conceyvid by zour
right honorable lettres wrytin at zour Cytee of Rouen the xij.
day of Marche, the whych I have receyvid ryght late syth Pask,
wyth othir zour lettres undir zour Pryve Seale, chargyng me to
assaye by all the menesse that I kan to exyte and stirre sych as
been able gentilmen wythin the shyre and the contree
<P 7>
that I dwell in, to kome ovyr to zowe at zour Wage, armyd and
arayde as langys to thaire astate, to do zowe servyce, and for
to certifie als wele to zowe os to zour Counsell of thaire
answere and thaire will, the whych zour hegh comaundement I have
bygunne to labour apon and sall trewely forthe dayly wyth all my
myght till I have perfourmd zour forsayde comaundement. And upon
Wedynsdaye next sall zour Justice sitte at Zorke opon the
deliverance of the Gaole there and a Cession of the Pees also,
at which tyme I suppose to speke with many of the gentyls there,
and als sone aftyr as I maye be answerd I sall certifie os zowe
hase lykid to comaunde me, wyth all the haste possible. Ryght
excellent, hegh, and ryght myghty Prynce and moste dredde
sovereyne Lorde I beseche the blissid Trinite to spede zowe and
kepe zowe, and all zour worshipfull oste, and sende zowe sone in
to zour roialme of Inglande wyth a joyouse maryage and a gude
pees for his mykill mercy. Writin at zour awne logge of
Metheleye the xij daye of Aprill
   zour trewe liege man and subgitte
   Robt. Wat'ton.

<Q OR1 1450S? EDWARD4>
<A EDWARD IV>
<G M>
<P 9>
[} [\LETTER V. EDWARD THE FOURTH WHEN EARL OF MARCHE, AND HIS
BROTHER THE EARL OF RUTLAND, TO THEIR FATHER RICHARD DUKE OF
YORK.\] }]
   Ryght hiegh and ryght myghty Prince, oure ful redouted and
ryght noble lorde and ffadur, as lowely with all oure herts as
we youre trewe and naturell sonnes can or may, we recomaunde us
un to your noble grace, humbly besechyng your nobley & worthy
ffaderhode daily to yeve us your hertely blessyng: thrugh whiche
we trust muche the rather to encrees and growe to vertu, and to
spede the bettur in all matiers and things that we schall use,
occupie, and exercise. Ryght high and ryght myghty Prince, our
ful redouted lorde and ffadur, we thanke our blessed Lorde not
oonly of your honourable conduite and good spede in all your
matiers and besynesse, and of your gracious preuaile ayenst
thentent & malice of your evilwillers, but also of the knowelage
that hit pleased your nobley to lete us nowe late have of the
same by relacion of Syr Watier Deureux knyght, and John
<P 10>
Milewatier squier, and John at Nokes yemon of your honorable
chambur. Also we thonke your noblesse and good ffadurhod of our
grene gownes nowe late sende unto us to our grete comfort;
beseching your good lordeschip to remembre our porteux, and that
we myght have summe fyne bonetts sende un to us by the next
seure messig', for necessite so requireth. Overe this, ryght
noble lord and ffadur, please hit your highnesse to witte that
we have charged your servant William Smyth berer of thees for to
declare un to your nobley certayne things on our behalf, namely
concernyng and touching the odieux reule and demenyng of Richard
Crofte and of his brother. Wherefore we beseche your graciouse
lordeschip and full noble ffadurhood to here him in exposicion
of the same, and to his relacion to yeve ful feith and credence.
Ryght hiegh and ryght myghty Prince, our ful redoubted and ryght
noble lorde and ffadur, we beseche almyghty Jhu~ yeve yowe as
good lyfe and long with asmuche contenual perfite prosperite as
your princely hert con best desir. Writen at your Castill of
Lodelowe on Setursday in the Astur Woke.
   Your humble sonnes
   E. Marche and
   E. Rutlonde.

<Q OR1 1452 RICHARDY>
<A RICHARD DUKE OF YORK>
<G M>
<P 11>
[} [\LETTER VI. RICHARD DUKE OF YORK TO THE CITIZENS OF
SHREWSBURY.\] }]
   Right worshipful friends, I recommend me unto you, and I
suppose it is well known unto you, as well by experience as by
common language said and reported throughout all Christendom,
what laud, what worship, honour, and manhood was ascribed of all
Nations unto the people of this Realm, whilst the Kingdom's
Sovereign Lord stood possessed of his Lordship in the realm of
France, and Dutchy of Normandy; and what derogation, loss of
merchandize, lesion of honour, and villany, is said and reported
generally unto the English nation, for loss of the same; namely
unto the Duke of Somerset, when he had the commandance and
charge thereof: the which loss hath caused and encouraged the
King's enemies for to conquer and get Gascony and Gyanne, and
now daily they make their advance for to lay siege unto Calais,
and to other places in the Marches there, for to apply them to
their obeisance, and so for to come into the land with great
puissance; to the final destruction
<P 12>
thereof, if they might prevail, and to put the land in their
subjection, which God defend. And on the other part it is to be
supposed it is not unknown to you, how that, after my coming out
of Ireland, I, as the King's true liege man, and servant, and
ever shall be to my life's end, and for my true acquital,
perceiving the inconvenience before rehearsed, advised his Royal
Majesty of certain Articles concerning the weal and safeguard,
as well of his most royal person, as the tranquillity and
conservation of all this his realm: the which Advertisements,
how be it that it was thought that they were full necessary,
were laid apart, and to be of none effect, through the envy,
malice, and untruth of the said Duke of Somerset; which for my
truth, faith, and allegiance that I owe unto the King, and the
good will and favour that I have to all the Realm, laboureth
continually about the Kings Highness for my undoing, and to
corrupt my blood, and to disherit me and my heirs, and such
persons as be about me, without any desert or cause done or
attempted on my part or theirs, I make our Lord Judge.
Wherefore, worshipful Friends, to the intent that every man
shall know my purpose, and desire for to declare me such as I
am, I signify unto you that with the help and supportation of
Almighty God, and of our Lady, and of all the Company of Heaven,
I, after long sufferance and delays, not my will or intent to
displease my sovereign Lord, seeing that the said
<P 13>
Duke ever prevaileth and ruleth about the King's person, that by
this means the land is likely to be destroyed, am fully
concluded to proceed in all haste against him, with the help of
my kinsmen and friends; in such wise, that it shall prove to
promote ease, peace, tranquillity, and safeguard of all this
land: and more, keeping me within the bounds of my liegeance as
it pertaineth to my duty, praying and exhorting you, to fortify,
enforce, and assist me, and to come to me with all diligence,
wheresoever I shall be, or draw, with as many goodly and likely
men as ye may make to execute the intent abovesaid. Written
under my signet at my Castle of Ludlow, the 3rd day of February.
Furthermore I pray you, that such strait appointment and
ordinance be made, that the people which shall come in your
fellowship, or be sent unto me by your agreement, be demeaned in
such wise, by the way, that they do no offence, nor robbery, nor
oppression upon the people, in lesion of justice. Written as
above, &c.
   Youre good Frend
   R. York.
   To my right worshipful Friends, the Bailiffs, Burgesses, and
Commons of the good Town of Shroesbury.

<Q OR1 1492? HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P 18>
[} [\LETTER X. KING HENRY THE VII=TH=. TO THE EARL OF ORMOND.\]
}] 
   By the King.
   Right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin we greete you wele,
and have tidings that our Rebelles landed
<P 19>
the vth daye of this Moneth in our land of Irland. Wherfore, and
forasmoche as we have sent for our derrest wif and for our
derrest moder to come unto us, and that we wold have your advis
and counsail also in soche matiers as we have to doo for the
subduyng of our said Rebelles, we praie you that, yeving your
due attendaunce uppon our said derrest wif and lady moder, ye
come with thaym unto us; not failing herof as ye purpose to doo
us plaisir. Yeven undre our Signett at our Castell of Kenelworth
the xiij daye of Maye.
   To our right trustie and right welbeloved Cousin Th'erl of
Ormond, Chamberlan to our derrest Wif the Quene.

<Q OR1 1495? HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P 19>
[} [\LETTER XI. KING HENRY THE VII=TH=. TO SIR GILBERT TALBOT,
KNIGHT.\] }] 
   H. R. By the King.
   Trusty and welbeloved we grete you wele. And not forgeting
the grete malice that the lady Margarete
<P 20>
of Burgoigne bereth contynuelly against us, as she shewed lately
in sending hider of a fayned boye, surmising him to have been
the son of the Duc of Clarence, and caused him to bee
accompanyed with Th'erl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel, and with a
grete multitude of Irisshemen and of Almains, whoes end blessed
bee God was as ye knowe wele. And forseing nowe the perseverance
of the same her malice, by th'untrue contriving eftsones of an
othr fayned lad called Perkin Warbek, born at Tournay in
Picardy, which at his furst into Irland called himself the
bastard son of king Richard; after that the son of the said Duc
of Clarence; and now the secund son of our fadre King Edward the
iiij=th=, whom God assoille; werethorough she entendeth by
promising unto the Flemynges and othr of Th'archedukes
obeissaunce, to whom she laboureth dailly to take her way, and,
by hir promes to c'tain aliens Capitains of estrange nacions, to
have Duchies, Counties, Baronies, and othr landes within this
our Royaume to induce theim therby to lande her to the
distruction and disinheritaunce of the noble men and other our
subgiettes thinhabitantes of the same, and finally to the
subversion of this our Royaume in cas she may atteigne to her
malicious propos that God defende. We therfor, and to thentent
that we may be alway purveied and in aredynes to resiste her
malice, write unto you at this tyme; and wol and desire you that
prepairing on
<P 21>
horsbak, defensibly arraied, four score personnes, wherof we
desire you to make asmany speres with their custrelles and di.
lances wele horsed as ye can furnisshe, and the remaynder to bee
archers and billes, ye bee thoroughly appointed and redy to
comme upon a day warnyng for to do us service of warre in this
caas. And ye shalhave for every horsman wele and defensibly
arrayed, that is to say for a spere and his custrel xij=d=. a
di. lance ix=d=. and an archer or bille on horsback viij=d=. by
the day, from the tyme of zour commyng out unto the tyme of your
retourne to your home again. And thus doing ye shall deserve
suche thankes of us for your loving and true acquitaill in that
behalf as shalbe to your weale and honor for tyme to come. We
praye you herein ye wol make suche delegens as that ye be redy
with your said nombre to come unto us uppon any our sodein
warnyng. Yeven undr our Signet at oure Castel of Kenilworth the
xx. day of July.
   To oure trusty and welbeloved Knight and Conseillor Sir
Gilbert Talbot.

<Q OR1 1497 HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P 32>
[} [\LETTER XIV. SECOND LETTER OF KING HENRY THE VII=TH=. TO SIR
GILBERT TALBOT. A. D. 1497.\] }] 
   H. R. By the King.
   Trusty and welbeloved we grete you wele, signifying unto you
that wher as Perkin Warbek and his wif were lately sette ful
porely to the See by the King of Scottes, and aftre that landed
within our land of Irland in the wylde Irissherie, where he had
be taken by our Cousins Th'erls of Kildare and of Desmond if he
and his said wif had not secretly stollen away. The same Perkyn
being soe upon the See, is commen to land in our Countie of
Cornewaille with ij. small shippes and a Breton prinse, wherupon
we have sent
<P 33>
our right trusty counseillour the lord Daubeney our chamberlayn
by land toward thoes parties, to arredie our subgiettes for the
subduyng of hym, and our right trusty counseillour the lord
Broke, steward of our household, by water with our armee on the
See now late retourned, to take the said Perkyn if he retorne
agayn to the See. And we shall in our owne persone, if the case
soo requir, goo soe accompanyed thiderward with our lordes mercy
withoute delay, as we shal subdue the said Perkyn and all othre
that wil take his part if eny such be. And therfore we hertily
pray you to addresse you unto us with six score talle men on
horsback defensibly arrayed, and no moo, without eny long delay.
And to mete with us at our manoir of Wodestok the xxiiij=th= day
of this present Moneth; and at your commyng unto us we shal soe
content your for your and thair conduyt money, and also wages,
as of reason ye shal holde you pleased; and that ye faille not
herof as our espesial trust is in you. Zeven undre undre our
Signet at our said Manoir the xijth day of Septembre.
   "To our trusty and welbeloved knight for our body Sir Gilbert
Talbot."

<Q OR1 1490S HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P 34>
[} [\LETTER XV. KING HENRY VIITH TO THE BISHOP OF BATH AND
WELLS.\] }] [^TO DR. OLIVER KING^]
   By the Kinge
   Right reverend father in God, right trusty and welbeloved wee
greete yow well, and have received your wryteinge by the which
wee conceive how there is word that Perkin is landed. Truth it
is that hee is soe landed, and at our Commons of Cornwall take
his parte, amongst whom on Munday last the eighteenth day of
September there was not one gentleman. On Sunday the
seaventeenth of September, Perkin and his company came afore our
Citty of Excester about one, after noone; and there inranged
themselves in the manner of a battell by the space of two
howers. Within that our Citty were our couzen of Devonshire, Sir
William Courtney, Sir Jo. Sapcotes, Sir Piers Edgecombe, Sir Jo.
Croker, Sir Walter Courteney, Sir Humfrey Fulforth, with many
other noble men both of our Counties of Devonshire and
Cornewall. This Perkin sent for to have deliverance of our said
Citty, which was denyed
<P 35>
unto him by our said couzen. Whereupon Perkin and his company
went to the East gate, and to the Norther gate, and assaulted
the same, but it was soe defended (blessed bee God) that Perkin
lost above three or foure hundred men of his company, and so
failed of his intention. On the morrow after, the eighteenth
day, Perkin and our rebels made a new assalt at the said Norther
gate and Ester gate, like as by the Copy of the lettres from our
said couzen of Devonshire inclosed yee shall move to understand
more at large. The Perkin and his company, if they come forward,
shall find before them our Chamberlayn, our Steward of
Houshould, the Lord Saint Mourice, Sir John Cheney, and the
Noblemen of Southwales and of our Counties of Gloster,
Wiltshire, Hamshire, Somersett, and Dorcet; and at their backe
the garison of our said City of Excester. And wee with our hoast
royall shall not be farre, with the mercy of our Lord, for the
finall conclusion of the matter. Wee have done proclaimed alsoo
that who soe bringeth the said Perkin on live unto us hee shall
have the some of a thousand marks, and all those that give
theire offences first and last. Wee trust soone to heare good
tydings of the said Perkin. Yeoven under our Signet at our
Mannor of Woodstocke the twentith of September.

<Q OR1 1490S? HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P 39>
[} [\LETTER XIX. KING HENRY VIITH TO SIR WILLIAM SAY.\] }] 
<P 40>
   By the King.
   Trusty and welbeloved, We grete you wele. And have herde to
our great displeaser, that, for a certain variance and
controversie depending betwix you on the oon partie and Sir John
Fortescu on the othr, ye entende with unliefull assembles and
conventicles of our people to be at the Sessions next to be
holden within our Countie of Hertford, to thaffraying of our
Peas, and distourbance of the same Sessions, which we ne wold,
in eschueing such trouble and inconvenients that by likelyhode
might therupon ensue. Wherfore we write unto you at this tyme,
commanding you in the straitest wise, that, leving the said
assembles, ye forber to bee at the said Sessions, and neither
doo ner procure to be doon any thing there, privately or
apertely, repugnant to the equitie of our Lawes or rupture of
our said Peas, at your uttermost perell. And also that
immediately after the sight hereof ye addresse you unto our
presence, to knowe our further mynde and pleasur in the
premesses. Lating you wite that we have writen in like wise
herein to the said Sir John. Yeven under our Signet at our
paloys of Westminster the xxiij day of February.
   To our Trusty and welbeloved Knight Sir William Say.

<Q OR1 1504? MTTUDOR>
<A MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND>
<G F>
<P 41>
[} [\LETTER XX. MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND TO HER FATHER KING
HENRY THE VII=TH=. THE LAST NINE LINES ONLY IN THE QUEEN'S
HAND.\] }]
   My most dere lorde and fader in the most humble wyse that I
can thynke I recummaund me unto your Grace besechyng you off
your dayly blessyng, and that it will please you to yeve hartely
thankes to all your servauntts the whych be your commaundement
have geven ryght good attendaunce on me at this tyme, and
specially to all thes ladies and jantilwomen which hath
accompeneyed me hydder, and to geff credence to thys good lady
the berar her off, for I have showde hyr mor off my mynd than I
will wryght at thys tyme. Sir, I beseche your Grace to be good
and gracious
<P 42>
lorde to Thomas, whych was footman to the Quene my moder, whos
sowle God have soyle; for he hath byn on off my fotemen hydder
with as great diligence and labur to hys great charge of his
awne good and true mynde. I am not able to recumpence hym,
except the favor off your Grace. Sir, as for newys I have none
to send, but that my lorde of Surrey ys yn great favor with the
Kyng her that he cannott forber the companey off hym no tyme off
the day. He and the bichopp off Murrey orderth every thyng as
nyght as they can to the Kyngs pleasur. I pray God it may be for
my por hartts ease in tyme to come. They calnot my Chamberlayne
to them, whych I am sur wull speke better for my part than any
off them that ben off that consell. And iff he speke any thyng
for my cause my lord of Surrey hath such wordds unto hym that he
dar speke no furder. God send me comford to hys pleasur, and
that I and myne that ben lefftt her with me be well entretid
such wayse as they have taken. For Godes sak Syr, oulde mea
escwsyd that I wryt not my sylf to your Grace, for I han no
layfyr thys tym, bot wyt a wishse I would I wer wyt your Grace
now, and many tyms mor, wan I wold andsyr. As for thys that I
have wrytyn to your Grace, yt ys wery tru, bot I pray God I may
fynd yt wel for my welef erefter. No more to your Grace at this
tym, bot our Lord han
<P 43>
you en ys kepyng. Wrytyn wyt the hand of your humble douter
   Margaret.

<Q OR1 1500S HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P 43>
[} [\LETTER XXI. KING HENRY THE VIITH TO HIS MOTHER, MARGARET
COUNTESS OF RICHMOND.\] }] 
   Madam, my most enterely wilbeloved Lady and Moder, I
recommende me unto you in the most humble and lauly wise that I
can, beseeching you of your dayly and continuall blessings. By
your Confessour the berrer I have reseived your good and most
loving wryting, and by the same have herde at good leisure such
credense as he would shewe unto me on your behalf, and thereupon
have spedde him in every be halve withowte delai according to
yowr noble petition
<P 44>
and desire, which restith in two principall poynts: the one for
a generall pardon for all manner causes: the other is for to
altre and chaunge part of a Lycense which I had gyven unto you
before for to be put into mortmain at Westmynster; and now to be
converted into the University of Cambridge for your Soule
helthe, &c. All which thyngs according to your desire and
plesure I have with all my herte and goode wille giffen and
graunted unto you. And my Dame, not onely in this but in all
other thyngs that I may knowe should be to youre honour and
plesure and weale of youre salle I shall be as glad to plese you
as youre herte can desire hit, and I knowe welle that I am as
much bounden so to doe as any creture lyvyng, for the grete and
singular moderly love and affection that hit hath plesed you at
all tymes to ber towards me. Wherfore myne owen most lovyng
moder, in my most herty manner I thank you, beseeching you of
your goode contynuance in the same. And Madame, your said
Confessour hath more over shewne unto me on youre behalve that
ye of your goodnesse and kynde disposition have gyven and
graunted unto me such title and intereste as ye have or ought to
have in such debts and duties which is oweing and dew unto you
in Fraunce by ye Frenche Kynge and others, wherfore Madame in my
most herty and humble wise I thanke You. Howbeit I verrayly
[{think{] hit will be ryght harde to recover hit
<P 45>
without hit be dryven by compulsion and force, rather than by
any true justice which is not yet al we thynke any convenyant
tyme to be put in execution. Nevertheless it hath plesed you to
gyve us a good interest & meane if they woull not conforme
thayme to rayson and good justice to diffende or offende at a
convenyant tyme when the caas shall so require herafter. For
such a chaunce may fall that thys your graunte might stande in
grete stead for a recovery of our Right, and to make us free,
wheras we be now bounde &c. And verrayly Madame, and I myht
recover hit at this tyme or any other, Ye be sure ye shulde have
your plesure therin, as I and all that God has given me is and
shall ever [{be{] at youre will and commaundment, as I have
instructed Master Fisher more largely herin, as I doubte not but
he wolle declare unto you. And I beseeche you to sende me youre
mynde and plesure in the same, which I shall be full glad to
followe with Goddis grace, which sende and gyve unto you the
full accomplyshment of all youre noble and vertuous desyrs.
Written at Grenewiche the 17 day of July, with the hande of
youre most humble and lovynge sonne
   H. R.
   After the wryting of thys Letter, your Confessour delyvered
unto me such Letters and wrytings obligatory of your duties in
Fraunce which hit hath plesed
<P 46>
you to sende unto me, which I have received by an Indenture of
every parcell of ye same. Wherfore eftsoons in my most humble
wise I thank you, and I purpose hereafter, at better leisure, to
knowe youre mynde and plesure further therein. Madame I have
encombred you now with thys my longe wrytings, but me thyngks
that I can doo no less, considering that hit is so selden that I
do wryte, wherfore I beseeche you to pardon me, for verrayly
Madame my syghte is nothing so perfitt as it has ben; and I know
well hit will appayre dayly; wherfore I trust that you will not
be displesed though I wryte not so often with myne owne hand,
for on my fayth I have ben three dayes or I colde make an ende
of this Letter.
   To My Lady.

<Q OR1 1490S? MBEAUFORT>
<A QUEEN MARGARET>
<G F>
<P 46>
[} [\LETTER XXII. MARGARET MOTHER OF HENRY THE VIITH, TO HER
SON; SIGNING AS QUEEN.\] }] 
   My oune suet and most deere Kynge and all my worldly joy, yn
as humble maner as y can thynke y recommand me to your Grace,
and moste hertely beseche
<P 47>
our lord to blesse you; and my good herte wher that you sa that
the Frenshe Kyng hathe at thys tyme gevyn me courteyse answer
and wretyn ... lettyre of favour to hys corte of Parlyment for
the treve expedicyon of my mater whyche soo long hathe hangyd,
the whyche y well know he dothe expecially for your sake, for
the whyche my ... ly beseeche your Grace yt ... to gyve hym your
favourabyll ... thanks and to desyr hym to contenew hys
...yn.e.me. And, yeve yt soo myght leke your Grace, to do the
same to the Cardynall, whyche as I understond ys your feythfull
trew and lovyng servant. Y wysse my very joy, as y efte have
shewed, and y fortune to gete thys or eny parte therof, ther
shall nedyr be that or eny good y have but yt shalbe yours, and
at your comaundement as seurly and with as good a wyll as eny ye
have yn your cofyrs, as wuld God ye cowd know yt as veryly as y
thynke yt. But my der herte, y wull no more encombyr your Grace
with ferder wrytyng yn thys matter, for y ame seure your
chapeleyn and servante Doctour Whytston hathe shewed your
Hyghnes the cyrcomstance of the same. And yeve yt soo may plese
your Grace, y humbly beseche the same to yeve ferdyr credense
also to thys berer. And Our Lord gyve you as longe good lyfe,
helthe, and joy, as your moste nobyll herte can dessyre, with as
herty blessyngs as our Lord hathe gevyn me power to
<P 48>
gyve you. At Colynweston the xiiij=th= day of January, by your
feythfull trewe bedwoman, and humble modyr,
   Margaret R.

<Q OR1 1513 MTTUDOR>
<A MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND>
<G F>
<P 64>
[} [\LETTER XXV. MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND TO KING HENRY
VIII=TH=.\] }] 
   Richt excellennt, richt hie and mithty Prince, our derrest
and best belovit Brothir, We commend ws unto zow in oure maist
hertlie wise. Zoure ambassadoure Doctoure West deliverit ws
zoure lovyng lettrez in quhiwis ze schew ws that quhare ze harde
of our seiknes ze tuke grete hevynes. Deerest brother We ar
greitly rejosit that we se ze have respect to oure
<P 65>
disese, and thairfor We geve zou oure hartlie thankis, and zoure
writing is to ws gude confort. We can nocht beleve that of zoure
mynd or be zoure command we are sa friendly delt with in oure
faderis Legacy, quharof we wald nocht have spokyn nor writing
had nocht the Doctoure now spokyn to ws of the sammyn in his
credence. Oure husband knawis it is withhaldin for his saik, and
will recompens ws safer as the Doctoure schew him. We ar
eschamit thairwith; and wald God nevir word had bene tharof. It
is nocht worth sic estimacioun as is in zoure divers lettrez of
the sammyn; and we lak na thing; our husband is evir the langer
the better to ws, as knawis God, quha richt hie and michty
Prince, oure derrest and bestbelovit brothir, have zou in
governaunce. Geven under oure Signete at oure Palace of
Linlithg=w=. the xj day of Aprile.
   Your lowynn syster 
   Margaret.
To the richt excellent richt hie and michty Prince oure derrest
and best belovit brothir the King of England.

<Q OR1 1513 TDACRE>
<A THOMAS LORD DACRE>
<G M>
<P 92>
[} [\LETTER XXXIV. THOMAS LORD DACRE TO KING HENRY THE EIGHTH.
A. D. 1513.\] }] 
<P 93>
   Pleas it your Highnes to knowe I have receyved your most
honourable Lettres of your gracious thanks for my pure service
done to your Grace according to my dieuty, which is to me the
most singler comforth and rejoysing I can have; for by the same
I well perceyve yo=r= Highnes regardeth not the sinistre reaport
or rumor surmised ayenst me, ne your Grace regardeth or geveth
ony credence thereunto, wherby I am bounde the rather to doun to
your Highnes the most laudable and acceptable service I can or
may do, and so shall undoutedly at all my power: and where as by
the same your most honorable letters I understond your pleasor
and commaundment is that I shold effectually procede to the
spedy execucion of ij Roods opon the West and Medyll Marches to
the most annoyaunce of the Scotts that I possibly may, like it
your Grace to knowe
   Opon Thuresday last past I assembled your subgietts in
Northumbreland to the nombre of a thousand
<P 94>
horsmen, and rode in at Gallespeth and so to the watre of Kale
two myle within Scotland, and there set furth two foreyes; my
broder Philipp Dacre with ccc. men which burnt and distroyed the
Town of Rowcastell with all the cornes in the same and
thereabouts, and wan two towres in it, and burnt both roffe and
flores: and Sir Roger Fenwike with ccc. men burnt the Town of
Langton and distroyed all the cornes therein: which Townes er in
the hert of the countre two myle beyond Jedworth opon the watere
of Chevyot. And I come with a stale to a place called the
Dungyon, a myle from Jedworth, and so went to the Sclater furd
on the water of Bowset, and there the Scotts persewed us right
sore, ther bekered with us, and gave us hand stroks; there come
thre standards to bak theym, that is to say David Karr of
Fernehirst and the lard of Boudgedworth opon the oon side, and
the sheriff of Tevidale on the othre side, with the nombre of
dcc. men or mo. The lard of Walghope was hurt there with oon
arrowe and his hors slane; Mark Trumbill was strikken with a
spere and the hede left in hym, his hors was won, and diverse
Scotesmen were hurt there. And so we come forwards, where we saw
my broder Syr Cristofer Dacre with his oste arreyed at a place
called the Bellyng, which was to us no litill comforth, and to
hym gret gladnes seyng the small power we were of at that tyme.
   My said broder come in at Cressopbrige and there
<P 95>
entred the Medyll marches, and so come thorow Ledesdale to the
rughes wyre, xiiij myle within the ground of Scotland, and there
he put furth two forreyes: Syr John Ratclif with fyve hundreth
men in oon, which burnt the town of Dyker sex myle from the said
swyre with a towre in the same, thei layed corne and straw to
the dore and burnt it both rofe and flore, and so smoked theym
owt. Also the said Syr John and his company burnt the Townnes of
Sowdon and Lurchestrother with a towre in it, and distroyed all
the cornes about theym and toke diverse prisoners with much
insight and goods. Nicholes Haryngton, Nicholes Rydley, Thomas
Medilton, and George Skelton with othre to the nombre of fyve
hundreth in the othre forrey burnt the towne of Hyndhalghehede
and a towre in the same flore and rofe; and in likewise the
townnes of West sawsyde and Est sawsyde, with a Pele of lyme and
stane in it: and my said broder Syr Cristofer, with two thousand
horsmen and cccc. fute men with bowes for savegard of thost in
strayts come in a stale to Dykerawe; and there the said forreyes
releved to hym, and so come forward and met me. We had not
rydden above the space of a myle when we sawe the Lord
Chambrelane appere in our sight with ij M. men, and four
standerds; the othre thre standerds resorted to hym and so the
countre drew fast to theym. We put us in arreye and come
homeworde and rode no faster then nowr
<P 96>
shepp and swyne that we had won wold dryve, which was of no gret
substance, for the countre was warned of our comyng and the
bekyns burnt fro mydnyght forward. And when the Scotts had geven
us overe we retourned home and come in at the Redeswyre. I come
to Harbotill at mydnyght: my broder Syr Cristofer lay that night
at the towre of Otterburne, and opon the morne to Hexham, and
his folks in other townnes opon the water of Tyne, and, on the
thrid day at home, as many as might git.
   Sir I se not the gentilmen of the countre in a redynes for
defence of your bordoures, for certen of theym to whome I had
geven warnyng, as my Lord Ogle which promised to com to me, the
constable of Alnewike, and othre, trustyng thei wold have bene
glad to do your Grace service accordingly as thei have done to
your Wardens in tyme of werre, come not to me at the place
appoynted, wherby I was not accompayned as I thoght to have
bene. I was councelled and avised by my guyds to have rejorned
my purpose, and so wold have done, but oonly that I had
appoynted with my broder Syr Cristofer to mete hym in Scotland,
for he departed fro me to the West Merches to bryng my folks
from thens whome I might not disappoynt for I had no space to
gif him warnyng, it was xxx=ti=. myle fro me and more, and els I
had not keped my purpose which not is performed thanked be
Jhesu, and all your subgietts in savety bot a servaunt of myn,
which was
<P 97>
killed there, and two Scotts were slain and many othre hurt the
same tyme.
   Pleas it your Grace, as for the Rode to be made opon your
West marche I can not se how it can be done conveniently unto
the next light, for two consideracions, oon is bycause I dar not
be absent of this Medill March during this light, for fere the
Scotts schold distroye and burne the countrie in myn absence,
which I regard gretly; and oon othre is that my servants horses
which come to this Rode was sore labored, for thei rode
xxviij=ti= owres without any bayte. And in the next light I
shall, God willing, performe the said rode; and in the meane
tyme shall cause small Rodes be made, which shalbe as gret
annoyaunce to the Scotts as a great Rode shold be, and thus
shall yo=r= money be employed to the best I can, and for the
grettiest hurt and destruccion of the Scotts; for I shalbe as
goode a husband thereof as I wold be of myn awn, and alwey I
shalbe redy to gif accompt of the same at your pleasure.
   Also pleas it your Grace me seamnes it were necessary that
yo=r= lettres of commaundment were direct to my lord of
Northumbreland and to my Lord of Clifford, to cause their
tenaunts gif attendance opon your Wardens as thei have bene
accustomed to do in tymes passed, for as I understond my Lord
Cliffords tenaunts er warned not to ride without his speciall
commaundment.
<P 98>
   As for Newes of Scotland, like it your Grace to know, John of
Barton which passed into Fraunce in the Navye of Scotland,
launded at Kirkobrighe and ther toke seknes and disceced of the
same.
   There hase bene a gret councell at Saynt Johnstone, and all
the lords of Scotland was there with the Quene. It is determined
by theym that the Bisshop of Aberdene shalbe Archbisshopp of
saynt Andrewes: the bisshopp of Catnes shalbe bishop of
Aberdene; a broder of therl of Adthills shall have Catnes. The
Abbaye of Arbrothe is geven to Master George Douglas therl of
Anguyse son: th'abbaye of Dunfermlyn to Master James Hebburne:
the Priory of Coldynghame to the lord Chambrelane broder: and a
broder of David Karrs of Farnehirst is entred by force into the
Abbacye of Kelso and enjoyes it by intrusion.
   Also it is aggreed by the said Councell that the Castell of
Sterling shalbe vetelled and fortified in all hayst possible,
and the lord Borthwike shalbe capitane of the same, and have the
yong King in his keping there, and he not to be removed without
assent of the hole councell.
   At the same councell a communication was had, which Lords
shold haue the rewll of the lands for well and sou'te of the
realme, bot thei aggreed not thereopon; and so departed from
thens at that tyme.
<P 99>
Therl of Aren, admirall of Scotland, is commen home with the
Shippes of Scotland, and a French Knight with hym which hase
broght writtings and credence from the French King and the Duke
of Albany; what it is I know not as yit, bot I shall endevor me
to git knowlege thereof. Thre of the grettest shippes of
Scotland er left in Fraunce to the spryng of the yere, to
th'entent thei may assist the French navye as it is supposed.
   The gret Shipp of Scotland was ron on grounde, bot sho is
recovered as thei say or theire Admirall departed. The Scottishe
soldiours which be commen home makes evill reaport of the French
King, sayng thei were not well entreated there: and as newes
shalbe occurrant in thies parties your Grace shalbe advertised
by the grace of Almighti God, whome I besech to preseve your
most honorable estate. At Harbotill the xiij=th=. day of
Novembre at vj. of the clok in the mornyng.
   Your humble subgyet
   Thomas Dacre.
To the Kings Highnes.

<Q OR1 1514 WBURBANK>
<A WILLIAM BURBANK>
<G M>
<P 99>
[} [\LETTER XXXV. WILLIAM BURBANK TO KING HENRY THE EIGHTH.\] }]
<P 100>
   Pleas it your most excellent Grace to witt, that, as touchyng
the cause ... deithe of my Lorde and Master my Lorde Cardinall,
your Graces late Orator,
<P 101>
because that, aswell affore his departor by the Phisecians, as
aftur by a ... man that oppynyd his body by the Popis
commandmentt, itt was juged ... he shuld have been posonyd, or
att the leste grett tokens and as some ... saide manyfest thyngs
therof apperide, the Popes said holines haith sith caused moste
diligentt and exactt examynacion to be maide uppon the same. And
by cause that it was known all most manyfestlie that the busshop
of Worcestr, now y=r= Graces Orator, was enymye unto my said
Lorde, itt was sodenlie noiside throughe the citie that he
shulde have ... auctor of this great pretendid offence. A certan
prest namyd Ranalde .. Modena was moche in my lords chamber, and
alway dere and fa ... with the said busshop of Worcestr. Uppon
suspicion he was taken by ... Popis commandment and sett in
Castill Angill. By cause that I shuld conduce home my said Lords
companye, and com unto your Grace his Holines commandide me to
be contynually at the said examynacion d ... by the Auditor of
the Chamber, the castellan, two bisshops, and the Fiscall, with
sundrie notaries; to th'ententt that I seing the ordor thereof
shuld soo make relacion unto your Grace. I taryed there whils
thre days aftur my said Lords departor wer expiride; soo that
then our company ... no house to tary in butt muste neds
departt. All this tyme the said Rainalde wold no thyng
<P 102>
graunt of his offence or knowledge commyttide in this bihalfe.
Albe itt he graunttide that mony tymes he revelate my lords
secretts unto the said busshop, and sundrie oder thynges wherby
the Juges eft ... hym worthy to suffre tortour: and delivered
unto his lernydt counsaill a ... of his said confession for his
defence, with sufficientt respett of tyme to aunswer unto the
same according to the law. Wheruppon supposing no ... confession
to have been made by the said Ranalde I tooke my leaf a ...
Popis Holines, and soo my Journey homwarde, this night being in
... of Florence. Your trewe and faithfull Servante my felow
Master Richard Pace haith sentt unto me his Lettres desiring me
to advertise Your Grace uppon ... contenttes of the same. He
writithe that the said Ranalde within ... tyme of his
deliberacion to aunswer frelie and withoutt manyshing o ... ony
creator haith oppenlie confesside that he hym self putt poson
into my said lords potage att the desire and conduction therunto
of the busshop of Worcestr; this he did soon aftur the fest of
Corpus Christi laste. He confesside that the said busshop yeve
hym for his labors in this bihalfe xv. ducats of gold, som
large, and som (\de camera\) . Item that the said busshop said
thes wordes unto hym, "If we rid nott this Cardenall of the
worlde, we shall never be in quietnes." Item he confesside ...
oon Stephan,
<P 103>
secret chamberlan unto the said busshop of Worcestr was ...
herunto. He saith he did by the said poson in a Citie namyd Sp
... nott verray farr from Rome, and kepid itt a good space in
his chambre under a tyyll stoon. All this his confession is
writen in the proctor his booke by his own hande (\in processu\)
. And sithen, the said Ranalde ... writen this his confession
[{in{] his awne hande and haith confesside the same unto my
Lorde Cardenall de Medicis your Graces protector, whom the Popis
Holines (aftire he was informyd by the saide Juges herof) sentt
purposlye to knowe the verray treuthe. Nott oonlie the said
Ranalde haith thus confesside, and writen the same of his own
hande, butt also confermyd itt with oon grett oithe. He made
this confession frelie, to thintentt itt shulde be shewide
immediatlie unto the Popes holines, supposing therby that his
said Holines shuld have grauntted hym hys lyve, and desiride the
same of my said Lorde de Medicis, who aunswerde that he shuld
have pardon of all thynges that he had confesside (whiche was
thefte and mony oder enormyties) save oonlie of killing of my
Lorde Cardinall. Uppon the morow aftur, the said Ranalde, with a
small knyff that he had secrett, smott hym self, wolfully
intending to have killed hym self, and therof is in poontt of
deithe as is supposide without recovery; and saith that he
knowth perfitelie to be
<P 104>
perpetually for this act dampnyd. My said felow writithe that
the said busshop haith obteignyd suche frendes by mean of his
monye, that he trustith to ascaipe this jeopardie of correction.
And also that som your Grace's lovers shewid hym sith my
departour from Rome that the Popis Holines wold gladlie have the
matier coloride upon the busshops partie speciallie, for that
service that the said busshop shulde have doon for his Holines
in procuring (soo farr as in him was) peax bitwixtt your Grace
and the Franshe King. Verralie I can nott bileve that his
Holines ever intendide this; remembring soo strate examynacion
as he haith causid to be made herein, and from the begynnyng
therof knew perfitelie that all suspicion herof was oonlie
ayanste the saide busshop. And I trust verralie his Holines woll
advertise your Grace right shortlie uppon the hool processe maid
in this bihalf, for in the begynning of this examynacion he
saide that if itt war possible he wolde " (\reddere rationem
Sacrae Majestati vestrae super interitu Cardinalis sui\) ." By
sids this, all the hooll College woll call for the correction
herof. He writing to me also that now all Rome is full of the
rumor of this detestable act, the forsaid Stephan is taken and
sett in the Castill. Som ther be that haith noside in Rome how
that the poson shuld have been sentt from England by som prelate
thare, being enemye unto my said late
<P 105>
Lorde, and procuride the same to be mynystrid unto hym by his
cooke. Wheruppon soundrie men hath inquyred the same boith of my
said felo and me, wherunto we aunswerde that our master had no
suche enymyes in England, ne that Prelates of Englande and
English borne wer ever disposed unto ony suche actes. My said
felow writithe that he is informyde by som, your Graces frendes,
that sithe the saide confession was shewide unto the Popes
Holines moche secret labor haith been made unto the same; that
the foresaid Ranalde shulde revooke or excuse his said
confession made ayanste the saide bushop. In his confession
making ... desiride the Popis Holines instantlie to regarde the
said busshops ... and to have compassion uppon hym. Els he said
that he muste nedes be undoon; tho itt warr butt oonlie by means
of my Lorde Cardinall Hadrian. In all haste possible, aftur that
knowlege com unto me, I did depeche this berar towards Your
Grace for to advertise the same of the premisses. My said felow
writithe no thyng what ordor is intendide for the correction
heroff. I have therfore writen unto hym that in ony wise he
shall signifye unto your Grace when and assoon as the saide
ordor shalbe determynyde. In tyme of writing ... I was soore
ceaside: as may somdeall be percevide by the rude maner of the
besechyng yo=r= Grace to have patiens therin with me. Thus I
shall duryng lyve humble bisiche our Lorde
<P 106>
Jhu~ for the preservation of your Graces mosth hygh and roiall
astate. From Florence the xxviij=th=. day of Auguste M.D. xiiij.
   Your Grace's moste lawlie,
   faithfull, and trewe subgett
   [\THE SIGNATURE BURNT.\]
To the Kinge's most noble Grace.

<Q OR1 1514 WBURBANK>
<A WILLIAM BURBANK>
<G M>
<P 106>
[} [\LETTER XXXVI. WILLIAM BURBANK'S SECOND LETTER TO KING HENRY
VIII=TH=.\] }] 
   Pleas itt your moste noble Grace, aftur that I hade closid my
former Lettre unto the same, I recevide from your faithfull
servantt M. Richard Pacie, my felow, in writing, how that the
prest that posonyd my lord and master was inducyd by his
confessors, by mean of the busshop of Worcestr, that he shuld
instantly deny his confession. And the said busshop laborid to
have instrumenttes maide uppon the same. By inforsing of his
said Confessors he denyde the space of two days, being all that
tyme in poyntt of deith: butt ever he did banne and accurst the
busshop of Worcestr, and the tyme that ever he bigan to have
famyliaritie or practice with hym. Aboutt the sext hour of the
xxvj. day of this monthe the said prest dyyde of his
<P 107>
own wilfull stroke. Albe itt iiij. or v. houres affore he dyyd,
he graunttid of new unto his surgion and phisician that he
posynyde my said lorde: butt he did not shew by whoos instance
being so commandid by his confessors. The Popis Holines haith
promyttid that Justice shall be ministride in this behalf; and
that all his confessions and processe maid ayanst the said prest
shall be kepid in suretie for your Grace to looke uppon att your
pleasor; with also sundrie lettres of the said busshops which
(as he saith) be hool ayanst hym self. Their is no confession of
the said Ranald taken thayr in effectt, save oonlie his furst
confession whiche remanyth in processe of the Juges. He saith
also that my lord your Graces protector haith promyttid that the
said prests body shalbe ower bruntt or quartride. He saith that
many gret men haith offerid them self to kill the said busshop
of Worcestr for this actt: and that all Rome be inflamyde
ayanste hym for the same, boith spirituall and temporall. He
writith also that he is secretlie informyde that the said
busshop is taken, but the Popis Holines having regarde that he
is your Graces Orator, itt is thought he woll desiste of
condigne correction doyng ayanste hym, whils he shall perceve
your pleasor in that bihalf. Thus I shall besiche the blissid
Trinitie for the preservacion of your most highe and Roiall
astate. From
<P 108>
Florence the xxviij. day of Auguste att nyght M. D. xiiij. Youre
moste humble trew and faithfull subjectt,
   William Burbanke.
   To the Kings most noble Grace.

<Q OR1 1514 MYTUDOR>
<A MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE>
<G F>
<P 115>
[} [\LETTER XXXIX. MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE TO KING HENRY THE
EIGHTH.\] }] 
<P 116>
   My good Brother as hertly as I can I recomaund me unto your
Grace, mervelynge moch that I never herd form you syns ... re
depertynge, so often as I have sent and wrytten to you. And now
am I left post a lone in effect; for on the morn next after ...
e maryage my chambirlayn with all other men servants wer
dischargd and in lyke wyse my mother Guldeford with other my
women and maydyns, except such as never had experiens nor
knowlech how to advertyse or gyfe me counsell yn any tyme of
nede, which is to be fered more schortly then your Grace thought
at the tyme of my depertynge, as my mother Guldeford can more
playnly schew your Grace then I cann wryt; to whom I beseche you
to gyve credens. And yf hit may be by eny meane possible, I
humbly requyr you to cause my seyd mother Guldeford to repayr
hither
<P 117>
once agayn. For ells if any chauns happe other then weale I
schall not knowe wher nor of whom to aske any good counsell to
your pleasur, nor yet to myn own proffit. I merveill moche that
my Lord of Northfolke wold at all tymes so lyghtly graunt every
thynge at ther reqwests here. I am weale assured that when ze
know the trouth of every thyng as my mother Guldeford can schew
you, ze wold full lyttyll have thowght I schold have ben thus
intreated: that wold God my Lord of Zorke had com with me yn the
rome of Northfolke: for then am I sure I schuld have bene left
moch more at my herti ... then I am now. And thus I byd your
Grace fare weale with ... as ever had Prince; and more hertis
ease then I have now. ... Abvile the xij=th=. day of October.
   ...gef gredens to my mowder
   Geldeford. Be your lowyng
   syster Mary Quene of France.

<Q OR1 1514 MYTUDOR>
<A MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE>
<G F>
<P 117>
[} [\LETTER XL. MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE TO THOMAS WOLSEY, THEN
ARCHBISHOP OF YORK.\] }] 
   ... I recomaund me un to you as hertly as I can, and as
schoth ... intreated as the kynge and you
<P 118>
thought I schuld have ben, for ... the morn next after the
maryage, all my servants, both men and women ... dyscharged.
Insomoch that my mother Guldeford was also dischargyd, whom as
ze knowe the kynge and zou willed me in eny wyse to be
cowncelled. But for eny thynge I myght do, yn no wyse myght I
have any graunt for her abode here, which I assure you my lord
is moch to my discomffort; besyd meny other discomffortis that
ze wold full lyttyll have thought. I have not zet seen yn
Fraunce eny lady or jentill woman so necessary for me as sche ys
nor zet so mete to do the kynge my brother service as sche ys.
And for my part my lord, as ze love the kynge my broder and me,
fynd the meanes that sche may yn all hast com hither agayn, for
I had as lefe lose the wynnynge I schall have yn France as to
lose her counsell when I schall lacke it, which is not like long
to be required, as I am sure the nobill men and jentillmen can
schew you more then becometh me to wryte yn this matter. I pray
you my Lord gyf credens forther to my moder Guldeford yn every
thyng concernynge thys matter. And albehit my Lord of
Northfollke h ... nethyr deled best with me nor zet with her at
thys tyme: zet I pray you allwayes to be good lord un to her.
And wold to God my ... had ben so good to have had zou with me
hither when I ha ... rd of Northfolke. And thus fare ze weale
<P 119>
My Lord. Wryt ... ile the xij=the=. daye of Octobr.
   My Lord I pray you gyve credens to my ... ord yn my sorows
she have delyve ...
   ... Yowr on whyl I lefe
   Mary ...
   To my lovynge frend Th'archebischop of Zorke.

<Q OR1 1515 MYTUDOR>
<A MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE>
<G F>
<P 119>
[} [\LETTER XLI. MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE TO WOLSEY.\] }] 
<P 120>
   My nanne good Lord, I recomend me to yow and thankyng yow for
yo=r= kynde and lovyng Letter, dyssyryng yow of yo=r= good
contenevans and good lessones that yow hathe gyffen to me; my
lord, I pray yow as my trust ys in yow, for to remember me to
the Kyng my brother, for sowche causses and bessynes as I have
for to do; for as now I have no nother to put my trust in but
the Kyng my brother and yow.
<P 121>
And as yt shall ples the Kyng my brother and hys Counsell I
wolbe horderd. And so I pray yow, my lord, to show hys Grace,
seyng that the Kyng my howsbande ys departed to God, of whos
sole God pardon. And wher as yow a vyse me that I shulde macke
no promas, My Lord, I trust the Kyng my brother and yow wole nat
reken in me sovche chyldhode. I trust I have so horderd my
selffe so sens that I came hether, that I trust yt hathe ben to
the honar of the Kyng my brother and me, sen I come hether, and
so I trust to contenaw. Yff ther be any thynge that I may do for
yow I wold be glade for to do yt in thys partes. I shalbe glade
to do yt for yow. No more to you at thys tyme but Jh~s preserve
yow. Wretten at Pares the x. day of January 1515.
   By yowr lowyng
   frende Mary
   Quene of France.
To my Lorde of Yorke.

<Q OR1 1515 MYTUDOR>
<A MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE>
<G F>
<P 121>
[} [\LETTER XLII. MARY THE FRENCH QUEEN TO KING HENRY THE
EIGHTH.\] }] 
   My most kynde and lovyng brother, I humbly reco~mand me vnto
yowr Grace, thankyng yow interly of yowr comfortable Letters;
besechyng yowr grace
<P 122>
most humbly now so to contenwe toward me and my frendes, as owr
spessyale trowst ys yn yowr Grace; and that yt may layke you
w=t= all convennynte [^GAP^] to sende for me that I may shortely
se yowr grace wyche ys the thyng that I most dissyr yn thys
world and I and all myn ys at yowr gracs commandmente and
playsayr. At Parys the vj. day of Marche.
   by yowr lowyng suster
   Mary.
To the Kings Grace thes be delivered.

<Q OR1 1515 MYTUDOR>
<A MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE>
<G F>
<P 122>
[} [\LETTER XLIII. MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE TO KING HENRY
VIII=TH=.\] }] 
<P 123>
   My most derest and ryt entierly belowyde Lord ... brothare,
yn my most humble wys I recommande
<P 124>
me unto yowr Grace, shawynge unto yowr Grace that I do a pa ...
by my Lord my howsbande that y ... ar playsayde and contentyde
that he shale resorde on to yowr presence at swche tyme as yowr
Grace shale be at hys maner of Donyngton, wherby I se wele he
hys merwosly rejoysyd and moche comfortyd that yt hathe lyked
your Grace so to be playsayd; for the wyche yowr specyale
goodnys to hym showyd yn that be halfe, and for sondry and many
oder yowr kyndnes, as wele to me as to hym showed and gewyn yn
dyvers cawsys, I most humbly thanke yowr Grace; assewryng yow
that for the same I accompt my selfe as moche bonden un to yowr
Grace as ewer swster was to brother: and accordyng ther un to I
shale to the beste of my powr dowryng my lyef, endver myselfe as
ferre as in me shale be possyble to do the thyng that shale
stond with yowr playsowr, and yf it had be tyme convenyente to
yowr Grace hade be ther wythe pleassyd I wolde most gladly have
accompanyd my sayd Lord yn thys yowrnay. Bwt I trowst that
bowthe I and my sayd Lord shal se yow acordyng as yowr Grace
worte yn yowr laste Letters unto my sayde Lord, whyc ys the
thyng that I dessyr more to opteyn than all the honor off the
Worlde. And thws I beseche owre Lorde to send unto yow, my most
dereste and enterly be lowyd brother and Lord, long and
prosperows
<P 125>
lyfe with the fole accomplyshment of al yowr honorable dessyrs,
most humbly prayeng yowr Grace that I may be humbly recomanded
unto my most derest and beste be lowyd suster the Quene Grace,
and to the Quene off Scottys my welbelowyd suster, trowstyng
that she be asserteyned frome yowr Grace of the prosperows
estate and helthe of my everly beloved ny ... the prences, to
home I pray God send long lyfe. Frome Letheryng in Swf the ix.
day off Septembur, by the hand of yowr lowyng suster
   Mary Quene off France.

<Q OR1 1516? HENRY8>
<A HENRY VIII>
<G M>
<P 125>
[} [\LETTER XLIV. KING HENRY THE EIGHTH TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }]
<P 126>
   My Lord Cardinall I recommand vnto yow as hartely as I can,
and I amme ryght glade to here of your good helthe, whyche I
pray god may long contynv. So it is that I have resavyd your
letters, to the whyche (by cause they aske long wrytyng) I have
made answar by my Secretary. Tow thyyngs ther be whyche be so
secrete that they cause me at thys tyme to wrytte to yow
myselfe; the won is that I trust the quene my wyffe be with
chylde; the other is chefe cause why I am soo lothe to repayre
to London ward, by cause aboght thys tyme is partly off her
dangerus tymes and by cause off that I wolde remeve har as
lyttyll as I may now. My lord I wrytt thys vnto [{you{] nott as
a ensuryd thyng but as a thyng wherin I have grette hoppe and
lyklyodes; and by cause I do well know that thys thyng wyll be
comfortabyll to yow to understand: therfor I do wrytt itt unto
yow at thys tyme. No more to yow att thys tyme, (\nisi quod Deus
velit inceptum opus bene finiri\) . Wryttyn with the hand off
your lovyng Prynce
   Henry R.

<Q OR1 1515 MTTUDOR>
<A MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND>
<G F>
<P 127>
[} [\LETTER XLV. MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND TO LORD DACRE.\] }] 
My Lorde Dakers
   I comend me to zou as hartely as I can, and I have seen zour
vryteng and ondarstande at length, and I parcayve that ze ar
nouht sykerly informyd in what stat I stand in, for ze trow yat
I may pas vhar ever I vyl vyshe, is nowht trw; but yes berrar
can schow zou ye trowht of all, and vhat my mynd is, and how I
am constraynd to doo a gan my vyl. And I pray zou gyf hm kredens
as ze valde doo to my selfe, for it is owr lang to vryt, for I
have gret trast in yes man. And send me zour uter mynd and
ansuer in all thyng: and God kype zou. Vryten vy=t= my hand yes
Monday.
   Zour frend
   Margaret R.

<Q OR1 1515 MTTUDOR>
<A MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND>
<G F>
<P 128>
[} [\LETTER XLVI. MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND TO CARDINAL
WOLSEY.\] }] 
   My lorde Cardnal I comand me hartly to zou, and I am glad to
here that ze doo vell, and I have ressauet a letter from you and
a nother from my lorde Dakers vher of I beleffe you know the
effeyt. Ze vryte to me that sych parssons as he sent for my
maters in to Scotland trust to be vell ansuerd, and hath sent to
me sysch vrytengs as thay sent to hym. But my lorde I am gladar
of the tydengs that the Kyngs grace teld me of the Duk of
Albane, that he vyl com hyther, vysche I besech God may be trw,
but I dred it be not. My lorde I thynke ryght longe vyhil I
speke vyth you, for next the Kyngs grace my most trust is in
you, and you may doo me moste good of any, and I pray you my
lorde as soon as any body comes out of Scotland that you vyl
send me vorde, for I thynke long tyl I here tydengs. No more:
but God have zou in hys kypeng
   Zour frend
   Margaret R.

<Q OR1 1516 MTTUDOR>
<A MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND>
<G F>
<P 129>
[} [\LETTER XLVII. MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND TO KING HENRY THE
VIII=TH=.\] }] 
   Derest broder as hartly as I can I recomend me onto you, and
let you vyt that yesternyght I cam hyther, soo beyng confortted
of you in my jornay in many and soondry wyses that, lovyng be to
our Lorde God, I am in ryght good heal, and as joyous of my sayd
Jornay towarde you as ony woman may be in commyng to her broder,
as I have gret cause, and am moost desirous now to com to your
presens and to have sight of your person, in whom next God, is
myn oonly trust and confydens: advertissing you derest brotder I
have reseved thys day a Letter from my soons ambassadors, now at
London, which Leter I send on to you heryinne closed, and have
adressed on to them myn ansuer severally in twoe sondery
lettres, copy wher of I all so sende on to you, that apon notice
had of the same it may lyke you to comand whether of the said
letters ye seme besst at your plessur shall be delyverd. And the
Holy Trenyte have you my most derest broder in tuycion and
governance. At Stony Stretford the xxvij. day of Apryll.
   Zour loveng suster
   Margaret.
Unto my dereste broder the King's Grace.

<Q OR1 1516 MTTUDOR>
<A MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND>
<G F>
<P 130>
[} [\LETTER XLVIII. QUEEN MARGARET TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }] 
   My Lorde Cardinal I comand me to you, and I vould fayne have
spokyn vyth you but ye var gon or I coud cam to you and therfor
I most vryt to you my mynde. My Lorde I beseche you to schw your
gud mynd to me, as ye have doon ever, but specyaly now, for now
ys the tyme. Me Lorde I pray you hartly to get me som monne
aganst ... yr day for ye knaw vell I moust gyf part of rewards
and other nedful thyngs both for the kyng my brothers honour and
myne: and I schal not put you in no more troubul but I be sysch
you hartly my Lorde that I may have it to morow at nyght at the
farest: for ells I vyl be dysapointtyd. But I put my hooll trust
in you, and thys berar schal wayt apon you for your ansuer as
our Lord knouth wham kype you
   Margaret R.
On To my Lorde Kardenall.

<Q OR1 1516 MTTUDOR>
<A MARGARET QUEEN OF SCOTLAND>
<G F>
<P 130>
[} [\LETTER XLIX. QUEEN MARGARET TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }] 
   My Lorde Cardnal I comand me to you as hartly as I can and
vyt ze my lorde that I have spokyn vy=t=
<P 131>
James Aborrow and he hath schwn to me that ze and the lordys of
Cownsel vould not that I schuld cam to Bayners castel to day. My
Lorde I wyl doo as ze thynke best but I pray you my Lorde as
hartly as I can gyf ther be no trubyl to day to lat me com to
morow. I trust to God the schal be noo lych trobyl but that I
may cam to morow for and it be vell thys nyght I trust to god
the varst be past. And my Lorde I have I part of thyngs to doo
that I most nedes have doon that vyll be nedfol to me. I pray my
lorde to lat me have your aunsuer vyth thes berar and God have
you in hys kypeng.
   Yours 
   Margaret R.
To my Lorde Cardnal.

<Q OR1 1517 CTUNSTALL>
<A CUTHBERT TUNSTALL>
<G M>
<P 134>
[} [\LETTER LI. DR. CUTHBERT TUNSTALL TO KING HENRY THE
EIGHTH.\] }]
   Plese it your Grace to undirstond that besids al other maters
contenyd in our Lettres jointly written at thys tyme to your
Grace, oon is in them untowchyd by cause I wold not make my
clerke privey to the secretie theroff, which yff I shold not to
longe have taried the last curror save thys, I shold then have
written. But by cause then we wer sent for to come to th'emperor
commissionars, and our Lettres wer redy written contenyng a
longe discurse and declaration off many mattres shewyd by the
Cardinal Sedunensis which was necessary your Grace shold know in
al haste, we therfor not knowinge how long th'emperors
commissioners shuld lete us, dispached that poste, reservyng
thys to
<P 135>
be written by my selff at laysor which then I had not. The
thinge is this. The said Cardinal Sedunens. in makinge his long
discurse hertofor by us written, emongest other things shewyd me
that oon off the secrete mater stretyd betuyx th'emperor and
your Grace was that th'emperor entendeth to resigne the Empire
unto your Grace, and to obten your Election by hys procurement
and sollicitinge off the Electors therunto, which th'mperor
entendyd to do for the avancement of your honor and the love
which he berith you. Which mater when I herd I lete as I
nothynge had marked it, and lete hym passe on in tellynge off
his tale which endyd in thys, that thys thynge shold be oon off
the secrete maters treatid by hym betwix th'Emperor and your
Grace. Sire besids that I am your Graces subject and servant,
and sworn off your counsel thoff unworthi, your Grace hath also
shewyd so largely your bounteousnes and liberalite anenst me
that I ougth mo to desire the incresement and augmentation off
your Graces honor then any servaunt to your Grace belonginge.
Which I assure your Grace I doo tendre as moch to my symple
powar as any subjiet in your realme or ellys it wer pitie I
shuld lyve. And lykwyse yff therbe any thynge soundinge to your
Grace's damage or hynderaunce iff I shold concele it; ther coud
no pain be to great for me. Wherfor I most humbly besech your
Grace to accepte graciously and favorably the
<P 136>
thinge which now I write both for the ardent love which I bere
unto your Grace, and for the accomplishment off my dutie. Surly
yff it lyke your Grace I thinke the said Election off your Grace
to th'empire cannot be brogth aboute by no means, for diverse
considerations. Fyrste that lyke as in the Election off the Pope
a certain forme is to be kept which not observed makith the
Election to be voyd, so off auncient tyme and ordinaunce off the
universale churche a certain forme must be observyd in chesinge
off th'emperor, which ometted, the Election is voyde. Oon of the
cheffe points in the Election off th'emperor is that he which
shal be electyd must be off Germanie subgiet to [{the{] Empire;
wheras your Grace is not, nor never sithen the Cristen faith the
Kings of Englond wer subgiet to th'empire. But the Crown of
Englond is an Empire off hitselff mych bettyr then now the
Empire of Rome: for which cause your Grace werith a close Crown.
And therfor yff ye wer chosen, sens your Grace is not off
th'empire the Election wer voide. And iff your Grace shuld
accepte the said Election therby ye must confesse your realme to
be under subjection off th'empire to the perpetual prejudice off
your successor, or ells the said Election wer voyde as made off
a person not eligible. Besids that the forme off the Election
contenyth that the first he must be Kinge of Romains and the
coronation at Rome makith hym have the name off the Emperor,
wher befor he is callyd but
<P 137>
Kinge off Romains. Over thys yff th'emperor which nou is remain
stil Kyng off Romains as I understond he entendeth to doo, then
yff your Grace wer eligible and undir th'empire, yet ye coud not
be chosen Emperor, by cause ye were never Kinge of Romains. And
also he remanyng ye could not be chosen Kynge off Romains,
bycause the Kingdome is not voyde, and noon can be chosen therto
but when it is voyd edyr by dethe or ellys when the Kinge off
Romains is crownyd Emperor, wherby undir hym may be chosen a
Kinge off Romains. The said Empire also (as it is now
establyshed) may not have two Emperors at oon tyme, but oon as
cheff, and the odyr as here apparaunt, which is callyd the Kinge
off Romains, wher he must begyn that wyl come to th'empire. For
which considerations I repute it impossible (the laws theron
made stondinge) that your Grace may be chosen. And I am afferd
lest the said offer beinge so speciouse at the first heringe was
oonly made to get therby sum money of your Grace: Which they
move to have kepte secret lest the publyshynge off it shuld make
their intent to be knowen, and frustrate them off thir purpose
befor they coud acheve it. Surly yff it lyke your Grace my
simple advise is that your Grace interpretinge al to the beste,
and the said offer to be made rather off th'emperors good mynd
and grete benivolence then for odyr purpose, yff the mater shal
herafter be set forward or
<P 138>
movyd to gyff most exquisite thanks to th'emperor for his good
mynd therin: which peraventure may procede off good benivolence,
and so to withdraw your fote bake out off that mater, and to
make good interpretation opon so grete an offer, which shal be
most honorable. Thus in thys mater I have shewed my simple
advise and mynd; which, I thougth, my dutie savyd, I could not
kepe close from your Grace, wherin I trust such as be lernyd in
the law far bettyr then I wil afferme the same if it lyke your
Grace to make them privey to it. And iff I doo erre, as I
suppose I do not, I submitte to reformation besechinge your
Grace graciously to accepte my trew mynde and rygth meanyng in
thys mater, which I have touchyd for my discharge lest heraffter
it mygth be imputyd to me not to have shewyd it in tyme when it
came first to my knowlege. In al other maters at thys tyme we
have written at large how her we find not al persons inclyned at
it was thougth they shold be. And thus Almyghty Jhu~ preserve
your Grace to his plesur with encrese off mych honor. From
Machlyn the xij=th=. day of Februarie
   By your most humble subjecte and servaunt
   Cuthbert Tunstal.

<Q OR1 1519 RWINGFIELD>
<A SIR RICHARD WINGFIELD>
<G M>
<P 139>
[} [\LETTER LII. SIR RICHARD WINGFIELD TO KING HENRY THE
EIGHTH.\] }]
   Please yt your Highnesse to understand that the xiiij=th=.
day of this Month I wrote to your Grace my last Lettres, and as
yesterday, at afternone the Great Master came from Saynt
Germains there as the King lieth, hither to this Town, and as
soon as I hard that he was come I went to him to his lodging
where I found with him the Chaunceller, the bishop of Paris,
Robertet, and Vyl Roy, wher he toold me that he had commoned
with the King his Master of the Meeting and Entreview that shuld
be betwixt your Highnesse and hym, and made me to sytt down with
them and sayd I shuld have aunswer to every Article of myn
Instructions
<P 140>
concernyng the said Entreview and Meeteng. And first told me
that as to the tyme of the meting the King here is content, and
thinketh it convenient to be in the myddest of the moneth of
July, as your Grace hath devysed.
   And as to the place of the first meting which they think
necessarye is to be in a place neutrall, which place I have
rehersed to them hath been viewed by th'Erle of Worcester and
the Captayn of Bolayn, he sayth the King here is content with
that if better can nat be founde. Howbeit the Great Master
sayeth that if it pleased your Highnesse to be lodged at
Guysnes, and the King here to be lodged at Arde which is but a
league asonder he thinketh it most convenyent. Orels if good
serch were made by some oon of Calais such as it would please
your Highnesse t'appoint, and the King here t'appoint another,
there mought be found, upon the borders there, more convenyent
place than that, seing that there is noo houses nor village nere
it.
   And as to the next article of myn Instructions, which is that
both your Highnesse and the King here, the Queens, and all the
nobles shuld mete on horsebacke, and after th'imbracyng of eche
other familiarly they shuld repaire streyt to Calais; as to the
meting and embrasyng one an other a horsback without discendyng,
he sayth the King here thinketh it very good, and is content
therewith, whersomever the Meting shal be;
<P 141>
but to repaire strayt from thens to Calais and specially at the
first tyme, he sayeth the King his Master will not consent
therto, and thinketh it were not convenient, but sayth it were
better that your Highnesse were lodged in somme village within
the Englysh pale if any may be found there according, and if nat
in your tents and pavyllions, seeing that it is in summer, and
he to doo so likewise for his part within his ground uppon his
... whither ich of you might repaire to other after your first
[{meting{] at your plesures: and sayth that after the first day
of meting ... of good congruence must nedes be in a place
neutrall both for your honnors and in contentation of your
Pepull, the next day after the King and the Quene here shal be
content to come and vysyte your Highnesse and the Quenes Grace
wheresomever your lodging be, so that it be without Calais. And
to induce them that the King Highness might come to Calais I
have shewed them all the considerations which bee recyted at
lenght in myn Instructions: shewing them [{that{] without his
comming to Calais as in my said Instruccyons moch of the honnor
of the said Meting shal be lost: and that it cannot bee soo
honorably doon as it shuld be if it pleased hym to come to
Calais. Also for their further contentation and to meve them to
come to Calais without stoppe or difficultie I have shewed them
as is in th'instruccions: that inasmoch as your Grace shall not
<P 142>
oonly ... and take a right great journey before you come to the
See, but also must passe the See which is painfull, laborous,
and duangerous: and after so long passage to mete with the Kinge
[{here{] at a place syted in the confynes of his own Realme
having his hoole power at his backe, where as your Highnesse
commyth with a small companye, your puissaunce being seperate
from you by the mayn See, who so ever shall see or considre
thesame must judge that by your said comming over the See to hym
and m[{eting{] first in the place newtrall, by reason whereof
your Highnesse commytteth your noble personne to the trust,
confidence, and a ... of the King here. In consideration whereof
if the King here [{come to{] Calais at youre Graces desire, the
honnor and the preemynence [{shall be{] his as of reason it
ought so to be. And as your Grace is the ... aggre`able
accordingly, and for an equall corespondent I have [{told{] the
great Master that your Highnesse woll not stycke to v[{isit
him{] here in his town of Bolayne if your Grace be therunto
req[{uired{] . Whereunto they made me aunswer in making as great
dyf[{ficulty that{] your Grace shuld come to Bolayn as they doo
that the King here shuld come to Calais, sayeng that by reason
of the deth that has been there and is there yet, and also that
the Towne [{is{] so ... lykening it to a Dove hows, with many
other
<P 143>
excuses so that I perceyve well it is not their mynd to have
your Highnesse to Bolayn sayeng that the King here woll nat
comme there hymself.
   Also the great Master, the Chaunceler, and the bisshop of
Parys saye that if your Highnesse and the King here shuld bee
both lodged owther in Calais or in Bolayn with both your
traynes, which is at the lest a vj. thousand persones besides
them of the Towne where myght by the reason of a varlett, or a
page, or by a casueltye of fyer come any occasion of debate, or
whereby myght ryse any alarm, it mought be to th'inquietness,
disturbaunce, and daunger of you both. In example whereof the
bisshop of Parys rehersed of a great fraye of fyer that was at
Cambray at the great meeting there, which he sayth my lord of
Norfolk can well tell of. Also the great Master consideryth that
in July the time of the meeting shal be the hottest season of
all the year, and whan folks drynk most, and thinketh that
amongs such a multitude of pepull some dronken personne myght
cause inconvenience. In eschewing whereof the great Master, the
Chancellor, and the bishop of Parys be in the mind that nother
the King here shuld come to Calais, nor your Grace should not
come to Bolayn to lodge there. How be it, the great Master sayth
that he thinketh verrily that if your Highnesse lye at Calais
that the King his Master woll come, with a certain with him, and
see your Grace in Calais in maskyr, and saith that after your
<P 144>
Grace and the King here have seen oones togyther he puttyth no
doubte but that ye shall mete oftyn by your owne accorde.
   Also they thinke it good and convenient that when it shall
fortune your Highnesse and the Queen's grace with your trayne to
be uppon his ground and in his domynion, that your Grace, the
Queens Grace, and your trayn shall have the sovereignty, honnor,
and the right hand, as they think that your pleasure shalbe to
give the King here and his trayn the same, whan they shalbe in
your grounde and in your domynyon.
   And as to the nombre that shall come with your Grace to the
meting that is comprised in a Rolle; wherof they have the copye;
they think it very good, and woll order the Kings nombre here
according to the same.
   And also as to an Article in the said Instructions concerning
the ... of Apparell of every astate and personne, they think it
... like it very well, and say that they woll drawe a booke of
[{the same{] . Howe be it the great Master tellyth me that for
all the Princes of the Sangue Ryall, which be Mess=rs=
Delaunson, de Burbon, de Vandosme, de Seynt Poll, de la Rosche
Furyon, and the chief Officers, as the Constable, the iij.
Mareschalls, the great Master, th'Admirall, with divers other,
can in no wise bee comprised in any [{Rolle{] for Array; but
they to were at their pleasure.
<P 145>
This aunswer at ... this time, as touching your Meting and
Enterview I have of the Great Master, which he hath promysed me
with his furthur devise he woll delyver me in writing this day
or to morrow.
   He toold me also that he was specially charged by the King
his Master, that he shuld speke to me to wryte to your Highnesse
with diligence that when he sayth it was agreed betwixt your
Highnesse and the King here that what tyme it shuld please God
to send the Queens Grace a Prince or a Princesse, that the King
here shuld be godfather to the Prince, or the Quene here to be
godmother if it were a Princesse, and to bere the name after
them. Soo the King here desireth your Highnesse at this tyme
that if the Queen here shall have a sonne that it wold please
your Grace to be godfather, and that it may be named after your
Highnesse Har[{ry, and{] if it be a doughter that it may be
named after the Quene Kateryn; whereof he prayed me to wryte to
your Grace and ... that the King here shuld wryte to his
ambassador in E[{ngland{] of the same. Also he tellyth me that
the Quene is at Sain... and is mery for a woman being in her
case so nere her [{time{] and loketh every day to be delivered
before th'ende of this [{month{] of March. And as to th'aunswer
that I have for the ... of the Marchaunts I wryte at this time
more at length [{to{] my Lord Legat and Cardinall of England.
Beseching
<P 146>
... Trinite long to preserve your Highnesse. From Parys this
xvj=th=. day of March.
   [\THE SIGNATURE BURNT OFF.\]

<Q OR1 1519 TBOLEYN>
<A SIR THOMAS BOLEYN>
<G M>
<P 146>
[} [\LETTER LIII. SIR THOMAS BOLEYN TO KING HENRY THE EIGHTH.\]
}]
<P 147>
   Pleasyth it your Highnesse to understand that yesterday I
delyvered your lettre to the Kyng here with as harty and
affectuous recommendacions from your Grace as I cowlde devise.
And after he had at lenght and with good laysure read over your
said lettre, I declared to hym for my credence, according to
<P 148>
the Instructions which your Grace late sent me. First the
effecte of your said Lettre. And after I shewed hym how great
desire your Grace hath for the increase of his honnor, and what
pleasure and consolation your Highnes taketh in the same,
consideryng the unfeyned amytie and aliance that is established
betwixt you, both which your Grace belevith to bee soo rooted in
your hartys that what high honnor or advauncement shall fortune
to come to hym, the fructe thereof shuld redonde to your
Highnesse, wherfore to advaunce hym to the preferment of this
Imperiall dignitie, your Grace, uppon knowledge of his further
intent and mynd shalbe glad to employe your self as well by
worde and writing as by acts and dedes to the best of your
power, wheruppon he may assuredly trust. Wherunto, he, taking of
his bonett thanked hartely your Highnesse, and sayd that the
great love and favour which he well perceyveth that your Grace
beryth towardes him is the greatest comfort that he hath upon
erth. And for the great honnor that your Grace shewith to hym in
advauncyng hym to th'imperiall dignitie which is his most
desire, he sayth he knoweth nat how nor by what meanes he may
recompence your Highnesse in doing any thing so moch for your
Grace, but he sayeth as long as he lyveth, in any thing that he
may doo that shalbe to your pleasure, he shall always bee as
redy and as glad to doo yt as he wold be to doo for hymself, and
desireth
<P 149>
no thyng moore than to have knowledge wherein he might employe
hymself to doo your Highnesse some pleasure. Rehersyng to me
that by the reason of the perfecte love and aliaunce betwixt you
both he rekeneth your Highnesse to bee of great mygth and power,
sayeng that what with your owne puissance and with his help,
which he sayeth your Grace shall alwayes have redy at your
commaundement, there is nother honnor, dignytie, nor other thing
in Crystendome but that your Highnesse shall y... and ordre yt
at your own pleasure, and tolde me that he cowlde not expresse
to me with his tonge the due thanks that he t[{hinketh{] to your
Grace in his hart for the loving kindnesse that he fyndeth in
your Highnesse: and sayd that, whan ye both mete, which he
trusteth shalbe shortly, your Grace shall knowe his hart, no man
lyving soner. Wherunto I sayd that your Highnesse thanked hym,
specially consideryng that amongs all his other things and great
affaires, he is so moch desirous to mete, visite, and see your
Grace; and toolde hym of your conformable mynd therunto, shewing
to hym the tyme, place, fourme, and maner as is at lenght
expressed in th'instructions that I have. Wherunto he sayed that
he is determyned to see your Grace though he shuld come but
hymself, his page, and his lakaye: and that noo buysenesse shall
lette yt: how be it, for the tyme, place, and order of
<P 150>
the Meeting he said he wold common with the Great Master, and
within ij. or iij. dayes he wold send hym to Parys, wher he
shuld make me aunswer of every article concernyng the said
Entreview and Meting. And bicause that the Quene here hath been
very sycke thies ij. dayes, and in great daunger, as I have more
at large wryten of the same to my lord Legat and Cardinall of
England, which I am sure woll shewe your Grace thereof, I can as
yet have no aunswer what order shalbe taken for the Marchaunts
matiers. Beseching the holy Trynyte long to preserve your
Highnesse. From Parys this xiiij=th=. day of March.
   [\THE SIGNATURE BURNT OFF.\]

<Q OR1 1519 TBOLEYN>
<A SIR THOMAS BOLEYN>
<G M>
<P 150>
[} [\LETTER LIV. SIR THOMAS BOLEYN TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }]
   [{Pleasyth it youre{] Grace to understand that the xxj=th=.
day of this moneth I wrote my last Lettres to your Grace, and as
yesterday, which was our Lady's day, I was at Seynt Germayns,
where the Quene and my Lady lyeth; but the King roode on our
Ladye's even viij. leges hens, and as my Lady tellyth me it is
in a dowte whether he comyth ageyn before the
<P 151>
Quene here be brought in bedde or nay; for she lookyth her tyme
every howre. Also my Lady hath commaunded me, now while the
great Master is away, that I shuld resorte to her for any thing
that I shuld have to doo for the King my Master. And she hath
promysed me that she woll make me pryve of such newes as she
shall here of from any place: and toold me that the King her
sonne whan he departed willed her to shew me a Lettre that came
now streyt out of Spayn from his Ambassadour there, and
therewithall she called to her the tresourer Robertet and bad
hym shewe me that Lettre, wherein was wrytten by the said
Ambassador whose name is de la Roche Beauconot, that the King's
Highnesse had late sent a Lettre to the King Catholique
advertysyng hym how the King here had desired the King's
Highnesse by his lettres to wryte to th'Ellectowrs of th'Empire
in his favour, the rather to atteyn the dygnyte of th'Empire;
the which the King's Highness hath refused bicause of the Amytie
betwixt the Kings Grace and the King Catholique, and how the
Kings Highnesse had rather that the King Catholique wer Emperowr
than the King here; which Lettre he wryteth is in th'andes of
the Bishop of Bourges oon of the great Counsell of Spayn. Whan I
had redde this clawse in the Lettre sent out of Spayn, I prayed
my Lady that she wold gyve noo credence to yt, and shewed
<P 152>
her how I thought that the said Ambassador wrote this by
Informacion of some maliciouse personne that wold sett discord
bitwixt Princes; and that I assured her it was not trew. She
toold me that she had soo perfecte trust in the Kyng my Master's
honnor that she beleved, nor wold beleve, noo such thing; and no
more she sayeth woll the King her sonne: sayeng that whan the
King here redde the same clause in the Lettre wrytten to hym by
his Ambassadour in Spayn he did but lawgh at it, and gave no
credence thereto. And she saied it cowlde nat be trew, for the
... the Kyng's Highnesse desyring him to wryte to th...
th'Empire for hym. So that as farre as I can perceyve neyther my
Lady nor the King her sonne gyve noo credence to yt. And as moch
as I cowld instaunce her I have desired her not to beleve this
nor noo such thing that shuld be contrary to any thing that the
Kings Highnesse hath promysed or wrytten to the King her sonne.
My Lady also desireth that likewise as I woll make me pryve of
every thing that shall touch or arr... to the Kings Grace to
th'intent I shuld advertise the Kings Highnesse and your Grace.
She likewise desireth to bee advertised of any thing
apperteynyng to the King her sonne. She talked with me also of
the Meeting of the Kings Highnesse and the King her sonne (which
she moch desireth) wherein I shewed her according to myn
Instructions
<P 153>
that if it pleased her to m... the King her sonne that he wold
be content after they had mett a horsbak to repaire streyt to
Calais where they myght be honourably receyved, well and easely
lodged, it shuld be convenient for their estates. Whereto she
aunswered that when they had oones mett, she putt noo dowtes but
they shuld ... well enough, sayeng that after they had ones seen
togyther his Highnesse shuld desire hym to nothing but he wold
gyve thereto assent. She sayeng allwaies that it shalbe more ...
and triumphant to be lodged in sommer in the fields in tents and
pavilions than it shuld be in any Towne. She often [{asked{] me
of my Lady Princesse and of hir helth, if she hath been syck
lately or not. Also Madame la Duchesse the Kings syster, the
Duke of Alaunson's wief, lately hath been and yet is very sycke.
When I shall have knowledge of any other Newes I shall ... to
your Grace of them: beseching the holy Trinite long to preserve
your Grace. From Poyssy a leege from Saint Germains this
xxvj=th=. day of March.
   Yowres m...
   Th...

<Q OR1 1519? TBOLEYN>
<A SIR THOMAS BOLEYN>
<G M>
<P 154>
[} [\LETTER LV. SIR THOMAS BOLEYN TO KING HENRY THE EIGHTH.\] }]
   Pleasith yt your Grace to understand that the first day of
this moneth I wrote my last Lettres to your Grace, and as yet
the King is nat retorned from Melun, there as he hath been
almost thes fortenyght a huntyng. But hither is come Lettres
with great dylygence to the King Catholiques Ambassadour from
Frankford, and from my lady of Savoye, specefieng how the King
his master the xxviij. day of the last moneth, at x. of the
clocke afore noon, by th'assent and hoole voyce of all the
Electours was chosen Emperor. And bicause there is yet noo
lettres commen out of Almayn to the King nor my Lady here of
this matier my Lady marvayleth moch, and sayth she feryth that
Mons=r=. L'admiral is letted or evyll intreatyd bicause she hath
no word from hym, or elles their Post with lettres is taken or
stopped by the way. Neverthelesse my Lady sayth yf this be trew
seyng the King her sonne may nat be Emperor she is ryght glad
that the King Catholique is chosen. Sayeng that though the Kyng
her sonne is nat Emperor, yet it is a comfort to her that the
King her sonnes son in
<P 155>
lawe is Emperor. How be it the trouth is that both the King and
my Lady, and all this Contre had rather any other had been
chosen Emperor than the King Catholique. My Lady tellyth me that
she is assured it hath cost hym a greyt good to atteyn to this
Empire; in so moch she sayth she knoweth for a trouth oon of the
Electours hath had of hym two hundreth thowsand crownes, and
namyng hym of Coloigne. She sayth also that the Electours amongs
them all hath not had of the King her sonne past a hundreth
thowsand Crownes, and moch she ma... and fereth lest the
Admirall be nat well, and sayth that the Letter that she had
from hym was wrytten the xxvj. day of the last moneth, wherein
by his wryting he had as great trust that the King here shuld be
Emperor as ever he had. And now Mons=r=. le Bastard and they of
the Counsell here say yt is a good torne for the King here, and
a great weale for his reaulme that he is not Emperor, for they
say yf he had been it shuld have putt hym to an infante
busyness, and impoverychyd and undoone his subgietts. Here is
also of late a new Ordenaunce made by the King and his Counsell,
and gyven to all them that have any horses for Posts or Currors,
both here at the Cort and at Parys, that payn of their lyves
they delyver no horse nor horses to any man, ambassador or
other, except at the Court he have a bill from Robertet
<P 156>
in Parys from the first President there. I have been, too,
assuryd by my Lady that this is nat doon for any Lett of L...
that goyth in to England, but as farre as I can knowe that
resortyth in and owt of Spayn, and my lady hath ... whan so ever
I woll depeche any lettres by Post. I shall stre... a Bill of
Robertett and of the first President of Parys ... whan I woll.
   Besechyng the holy Trinite long to preserve your Grace from
Poyssy this iiij=th= day of July.
   Yours T...

<Q OR1 1519? RPACE>
<A RICHARD PACE>
<G M>
<P 156>
[} [\LETTER LVI. RICHARD PACE TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }]
<P 157>
   Pleas itt your Grace I have thys daye visite my Lady
Margarite, and have hadde off herre verraye large thanks for
that I have doon in Almayne for the Kynge Catholike in the late
Election. And all the noble men off thys Courte haith yevyn unto
me lyke thanks, and interteignydde me here in moste kynde and
lovynge maner, wythoute ony question made unto me off eny thynge
that I had doon in the sayde late Election for the advauncement
of the Kynge our soverayne Lorde, as your Grace thoght they
wolde have doon, as itt apperidde bi your laste Lettres
directidde unto me. And in verraye deade they have no cause to
complayne uppon me, for I dydde nevyr speke agaynst the Kynge
catholike in the sayde Election, considerynge that itt was
sufficient to me to have the Electors speke agaynst hym, and
allege reasons whye he schulde nott be electidde; ande suerly
they wolde nott have electidde hym yff fere off there persons
hadde not dryven them thereunto, and evident ruine off all there
nation yff they hadde electidde ony othre Kynge. And I forseynge
suche thyngis (as itt apperith bi diverse my Lettres sent to
your Grace in that cause, I ordrede my self there aftre wyth the
orators off the sayde Kynge Catholyke,
<P 158>
in suche maner that he, yff he obteignedde, schuld bi reason yff
sum thanks to the Kyngis Grace therfore. Master Hesdyng haith
wretyn to my Lady verraye acceptable Lettres concernyng the
Triumphe made there for the exaltation off the Kynge Catholyke,
and also off the Kyngis Grace's and your lovyng myndis towardis
thys House, to the grete rejoyse off all thys Courte. He haith
also wretyn to me a kynde Lettre offrynge unto me hys house and
all that is therin at my pleasure, and whyche commoditie I
intende not to use, but to take my voyage towardes Calice
tomorrowe. My Lady, with diverse lordis here, wolde have me tary
here bi the space off ij. dayes in continuall fests and
drynkyng, but itt is not for my purpose to be syke (\ex
crapula\) . Itt is not yet knowen whatt the army beynge at this
tyme in Gelderlande intendith; no hedde doeth appere emongist
them as yitt. Thus Jesu preserve your Grace in long helth and
continuall prosperitie. Writtyn at Mechlyne thys xxvij. off
July. 
   By your Graces most humble and feythfull servant
   R. Pace.
To my Lord Cardinalls Grace and Legat in England.

<Q OR1 1519 TBOLEYN>
<A SIR THOMAS BOLEYN>
<G M>
<P 159>
[} [\LETTER LVII. SIR THOMAS BOLEYN TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }]
   Pleasith yt youre Grace to understand that the first day of
this moneth I wrote my last lettres to your Grace; and on Sonday
last past about x. of the clocke at nyght, the Kings yong sonne
whos title is Henry of Seynt Germayn Duke of Orleans, was
crystened, the Duke of Alaunson was the second godfather, and
the duchesse of Denamours the god mother. And bicause York, this
berar, was there present who can shewe your Grace all the maner
and order of the crystenyng I leve to wryte to your Grace of the
same; saving that
P 160>
according as your Grace hath here a fore tyme wryten to me I
presented to the Quene here in the name of the Kings Highnesse
the Salt, the Cuppe, and Layar of gold, which was very much
praysed; and also the Quene and my Lady gave to the Kings
Highnesse for the same their loving and harty thanks. And after
all was doon the King came to me and sayd he thanked the King's
Highnesse of the great honnor that he had doon hym in crystenyng
of his chyld, sayeng that when so ever yt shall fortune the
Kings Highnesse to have a Prince he shalbe glad to doo for hym
in lyke maner, and that he is mynded after his said sonne shall
to age and be able to ... he purposyth to send hym to the Kings
Grace into Englande to doo hym service.
   And the hundreth pounde that your Grace sent to gyve in
reward, is bistowed as folowith. First the Noryce, oon hundreth
crownes; to iiij. rockers of the yong Dukes chamber, ij.
hundreth crownes; to iij. gentlewomen of the Quenes Pryve
Chamber called (\femmes de Ret...\) a hundreth and fyfty
crownes; and at the Offryng xx nobils, which amounteth in all to
the some of oone hundreth pounds sterling and xv. crownes over.
All which money was paid and delyvered by the hands of York this
berar and Richmount, which can shewe your Grace well inough
therof.
   Furthermore, as this berar can shewe your Grace, there hath
been with me at my lodging the Kings Porters, the T... and
Officers of Armys which with
<P 161>
importune manner asked reward saying that the Duke of Urbyn at
the crystenyng of the Dolphyn rewarded them, and wyth the best
answer that I could make them nothyng given they went away
miscontent. Neverthelesse it is ... by honorabull folks here
that the gyftes to the Quene, and the money that is gyven in
rewardes was sufficiently honorable, and largely inough for the
Kings honnor.
   I have also laid out xj=li=. xij=s=. in sendyng dyvers tymes
myn own folks and other that I have hired to your Grace in to
England, and to Calais, with Lettres in post and otherwise, the
which xj=li=. xij=s=. and xv. crownes that I have layd out now
more than hundreth poundes that your Grace sent me by York to
gyve in reward, is owing me. And forasmuch as the last money
that your Grace sent me for a hundreth dayes ended the
xxviij=th=. day of May last past I besech your Grace both to
send me such dyett money as shall best please your Grace, and
that the said xj=li=. xij=s=. and xv. crownes that is owing me
may be also delivered to my prest which shall attend upon your
Grace for yt.
   Also I receyved yester evyn from your Grace, a Letter dated
the xxviij=th=. day of May, concernyng the Marchaunts matiers
and divers other things, whereof after I have spoken with the
King, my Lady, or the Counsell here I shall wryte to your Grace
such answer as I shall have of them with diligence.
   Here is moch speking in the Court and more at
<P 162>
Parys of many straunge bouts, whereof this berar can shewe your
Grace by mowth as he hath hard, and as I have shewed hym.
Besechyng the Holy Trinite long to preserve your Grace. From
Poyssy this vij=th=. day of June
   Youre ...
   To my moste especial and singular Lord; my Lord Legat
Cardinall, Chauncellar of England.

<Q OR1 1523 T2HOWARD>
<A THOMAS HOWARD 2>
<G M>
<P 214>
[} [\LETTER LXXVII. THE EARL OF SURREY TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }] 
   Plesith it your Grace to be advertised, that upon Fridaye at
x. a clok at nyght I retorned to this towne, and all the
garnysons to their places assigned, the busshopriche men, my
lorde of Westmerland, and my Lord Dacre in likewise, every man
home with their companys, without los of any men thanked be God
saving viij. or x. slayne, and dyvers hurt at skyrmishis and
saults of the towne of Gedworth and the forteresses; whiche
towne is soo suerly brent, that noo garnysons ner none other
shalbe lodged there, unto the tyme it be newe buylded: the
brennyng whereof I commytted to twoo sure men, Sir William
Bulmer and Thomas Tempeste.
   The Towne was moche bettir then I went it had been, for there
was twoo tymys moo howses therein then in Berwike, and vell
buylded with many honest and faire howses therein, sufficiente
to have lodged M=l= horsemen in garnyson, and six good towres
therein; which towne and towres bee clerely distroyed, brent,
and throwen downe. Undoubtedly there was noo jorney made into
Scotland in noo manys day, leving
<P 215>
with soo fewe a nombre, that is recownted to bee soo high and
enterprice as this, bothe with thies contreymen and Scottishmen,
nor of truthe somoche hurt doon; but in th'ende a great
mysfortune ded fall, onely by foly, that suche order as was
comaunded by me to bee kepte was not observed, the maner wherof
herafter shall ensue.
   Bifore myn entre into Scotland I appointed Sir William Bulmer
and Sir William Overs to be marshallis of th'army: Sir William
Bulmer for the vangard, and Sir William Overs for the reregard.
In the vangard I appointed my lord of Westmerland as cheif, with
all the busshopriche, Sir William Bulmer, Sir William Overs, my
Lord Dacre with all his company; and with me remayned all the
rest of the garnysons and the Northumberland men. I was of
counsaill with the Marshallis at th'ordering of our lodgings,
and our campe was soo well envirowned with ordynaunce, carts,
and diks, that hard it was to entre or issue, but at certain
places appointed for that purpoos; and assigned the mooste
commodious place of the said campe for my Lord Dacre company
next the water, and next my Lord of Westmerland. And at suche
tyme as my Lord Dacre came into the feld, I being at the sault
of th'abbay, whiche contynued unto twoo houres within nyght, my
said lord Dacre wold in nowise bee contente to ly within the
campe, which was
<P 216>
made right sure, but lodged hymself without, wherewith at my
retourne I was not contente, but than it was to late to remove.
The next day I sente my seid Lord Dacre to a strong hold called
Fernherst, the lorde whereof was his mortall enemy, and with him
Sir Arthure Darcy, Sir Marmaduke Constable, with vij c. of their
men, one cortoute, and dyvers other good peces of ordynaunce for
the feld. The seid Fernherste stode marvelous strongly within a
great woode. The seid twoo knights with the moost parte of their
men, and Strikland your Graces servaunte, with iij C. Kendall
men, went into the woode on fote with th'ordynaunce, where the
seid Kendall men were soo handled that they found hardy men that
went noo foote bak for theym. The other twoo Knights were alsoo
soo sharply assayled that they were enforced to call for moo of
their men, and yet could not bring th'ordynaunce to the
forteresse unto the tyme my lord Dacre with part of his horsemen
lighted on fote, and marvelously herdly handled hymself; and
fynally with long stikmyshing and moche difficultie, gut forthe
th'ordynaynce, wan the howse, and threwe downe the same. At
whiche skyrmyshe my seid Lord Dacre and his brother Sir
Cristofer, Sir Arthure, and Sir Marmaduke, and many other
gentilmen, ded marvelously hardly, and found the best resistence
that hath be seen sith my comyng to thies parties, and above
<P 217>
xxx=ti=. Scottis slayne, and not passing iiij. English men; but
above sixty hurt. Aftir that, my seid Lord retornyng to the
campe, wold in nowise bee lodged in the same, but where he laye
the furst nyght: and he being with me at souper about viij. a
clok, the horses of his company brake lowse, and sodenly ran out
of his feld in suche nombre that it caused a marvelous alarome
in our feld; and our standing watche being set, the horses cam
ronnyng along the campe, at whome were shot above one hundred
sheif of arrowes and dyvers gonnys, thinking they had bee Scotts
that wold have saulted the campe. Fynally the horses were soo
madde that they ran like wild dere into the feld above xv. C. at
the leest in dyvers companys; and in one place above l. fill
downe a great rok and slewe theymself; and above two hundred and
fifty ran into the towne being on fire, and by the women taken
and caried awaye, right evil brent; and many were taken agayne;
but fynally by that I can esteme by the nombre of theym that I
sawe goo on fote the next daye, I think there is lost above
viij. C. horses, and all with foly for lak of not lying within
the campe. I dare not write the wonders that my Lord Dacre and
all his company doo saye they sawe that nyght, vj. tymys, of
sprits and ferefull sights. And unyversally all their company
saye playnely, the Devill was that nyght amongs theym vj. tymys.
Whiche mysfortune hath blemyshed the best Jorney that was made
in Scotland
<P 218>
many yeres. I assure your Grace I found the Scotts at this tyme
the boldest men, and the hotest that ever I sawe any nation: and
all the Jorney, upon all parts of th'army kept us with so
contynuall skyrmyshe that I never sawe the like. If they myght
assemble forty thousand as good men as I nowe sawe fifteen
hundred or two thousand, it wold bee an herd encounter to mete
theym. Pitie it is of my lord Dacres losse of the horses of his
company. He brought with hym above four thousand men, and lodged
one nyght in Scotland in his moost mortall enemys contre. There
is noo herdyer ner bettir knyght, but often tym he doth not use
the most sure ordre; whiche he hath nowe payed derely for.
Written at Berwike the xxvij. of September.
   Your most bownden
   T. Surrey.
To my Lord Legats goode Grace.

<Q OR1 1523 T2HOWARD>
<A THOMAS HOWARD 2>
<G M>
<P 223>
[} [\LETTER LXXX. THE EARL OF SURREY TO CARDINAL WOLSEY. A. D.
1523.\] }] 
<P 224>
   Plesith it your Grace too be advertised, that this Day at x.
a clok I received one Lettre of newes from Sir William Bulmer
sente hym fro the Priores of Calestreme, and one other sente to
me fro the Lord Ogle from Wark of such newes as he hath fro the
Priores of Ocles in Scotlande. I beleve right moche that the
contents of the Priores of Calestremys Lettres bee trewe; and
thoder doo not moche vary fro the same. Alsoo by dyuers other
wayes I have advertisments that the Duke prepareth all that he
can t'invade this realme with the light of this nexte newe Mone,
and by his words doo right litle esteme the poure of England.
<P 225>
Wherefor to theffecte of yo=r= Graces late Lettre I shall
tomorrowe send lettres to all the noble men and gentilmen
dwelling withen the Shiris conteyned in my commyssion too bee
here in this Towne the xx=ti=. daye of this Moneth, trusting
that and all men come accordingle the seid Duke shall fynd more
sharp recistance than he doth loke for. And notwithstanding that
the weder hath bee here soo foule with mervelous greate rayne
dyvers dayes, and mooste specially yesterdaye with rayne and
this daye with snowe, soo that the opinion of many wise men is
it shalbe very difficile for the seid Duke to cary any greate
ordynance onles it bee to Berwike, yet forasmoche as he myght
doo enfynyte hurte in over rynnyng the Contre onles he were
recisted, I shale cause all my seid poure to come forewards, and
to bee here at the daye prefixed. And if I shall see that the
Duke shall altre his purpoos in setting furth I shall
contermawnde theym, too thentente the Kingis Highnes shalbe put
too no more chardge shalbe requysite; whereunto I shalhave the
beste regard I can, the daunger of distruccion of the contre by
thennemys provided for.
   Mooste humble beseching your Grace too helpe that some
noblemen and gentilmen of the Kingis hous and the south parties
maye be sente hither though they bring no greate nombres with
theym. God knoweth if the poreste gentilman in the Kingis hous
were here, and I at London and were advertised of
<P 226>
thies newes I wold not faile to knele upon my knees bifore the
kings grace too have licence to come hither in poste too bee at
the daye of batayle. And if yong noble men and gentilmen be not
desierous and willing to be at suche jorneys, and to take the
payne and yeve the adventure, and the Kingis highnes well
contented with thoos that woll so doo, and not regarding others
that wolbe but dauncers, disers, and carders, his Grace shall
not bee well served when he wold bee; for men withoute
experience shall doo small servyce, and experience of war woll
not be had withoute it be sought for and the adventure yeven. Of
likelihode no man leving shall ever lyve to se the Scotts
attempte t'envade this realme with the powre of Scotland if they
may bee well resisted nowe. And by many wayes I am advertised
that the Duke of Albany is a mervelous wilfull man, and woll
beleve noo mannys counsaill, but woll have his owne opinion
folowed. And bicause the Frenche King hath be at soo greate
chardges by his provoking, having his wiffs inherytance lying
within his domynyons, dare not for no Scottish counsell forbere
t'envade this realme. I am also advertised that he is so
passionate that and he bee aperte amongis his familiers, and
doth here any thing contrarius to his myende and pleasure, his
accustumed manner is too take his bonet sodenly of his hed and
to throwe it in the fire; and no man dare take it oute, but let
<P 227>
it to be brent. My Lord Dacre doth affirme that at his last
being in Scotland he did borne above a dosyn bonetts aftir that
maner. And if he be suche a man, with Gods grace we shall spede
the bettir with hym. Fynally, mooste humble I beseche your Grace
to send more money, at the leeste viij M=li=.; and t'advertise
me of the Kingis pleasure and yours howe I shalbe further ordred
in any thing ye woll commaunde me, whiche too the beste of my
poure I shall fulfill, trusting that the gonners be well on the
waye hiderwards. And sory I am that the Kingis Highnes and your
Grace be nowe so fer in sondre, whiche I perceive is th'occasion
that my Lettres sente to your Grace from tyme too tyme bee the
lenger un answered, and also moche slouth is used by the Posts
wiche maye be amended if it woll pleas your Grace to write one
open Lettre too all the Posts, chardging theym to make such
diligence nowe in riding that your Graces Lettres fro London to
this towne, and my Lettres fro this Towne to London, maye bee
conveyed in xlviij. houres at the leeste, whiche they maye well
doo. And thanked be God, this nyght and this daye I have ben
well amended of my diseases. Written at Newcastell the viij=th=.
day of Octobr. 
   Your's most bownden
   T. Surrey.
To my Lord Legats good Grace.

<Q OR1 1523 T2HOWARD>
<A THOMAS HOWARD 2>
<G M>
<P 228>
[} [\LETTER LXXXI. LORD SURREY TO CARDINAL WOLSEY. THE LAST
SIXTEEN LINES ONLY OF THIS LETTER ARE IN LORD SURREY'S HAND.\]
}] 
   Pleaseth it your Grace to bee advertised that I have forborne
to write to your Grace sith the xviij. of this moneth, having no
verey certain tydings what the Duke entendeth to do unto this
day that I have received dyvers Lettres as well fro the Quene of
Scottis, fro Sir William Bulmer, and others, all which Lettres I
send herewith unto your Grace. And where in one Lettre is
conteyned that she doth send her servant unto me for peace
comprehending Fraunce, I truste this night or tomorrow to be
advertised fro your Grace of the Kingis pleasure and Yours howe
I shalbe ordred in aunswering any offre to be made to me fro
truse or peace, and shall defer making any answer unto the tyme
I shall knowe the same. And as towching the comprehension of
France, onles your Grace do write to me what answer I shall make
therein, I shall saye that I have none auctoritie to speke
therein; and that I beleve verely the Kingis highnes woll not be
content therewith, and that I believe his Highnes woll think the
Duke of Albany to be too meane a personage to medle with soo
high a matier: notwithstanding I woll advertise his Grace
thereof, and when
<P 229>
I shall knowe his mooste graciouse pleasure I shall advertise
your Grace of the same.
   And as touching her comyng awaye I shall shewe her that I
have commandemente to receive her if she come, notwithstanding I
think she might both doo more good in Scotland to the Kingis
highnes and to the King her son, then she shuld do being in
England. Assuering her that she shall lak no good helpe of the
Kingis Grace, she contynuing in her good mynde towards his
Highnes.
   Also pleaseth it your Grace to be advertised that upon
Tuysdaye last my Lord Marquise with all the gentilmen of the
Kingis hous came hither: and the same day came my lorde of
Northumberland, my lord Clifford, my lorde Latymer, my lord
Darcy, my lord Scrope. And sith that time is come all theire
powere, and all other gentilmen of Yorkshire hooly, and in
likewise Lancashire, and dyvers of Cheshire, Notingham, Derby,
Staff. and Shropshire, and all your Grace's retynue. And this
daye is come your Grace's treasourer Sir William Gascoyne. I
assure your Grace, God willing, we shall have men inoughe; and
the beste willed men unyversally fro the higheste to the loweste
that ever I sawe. And bicause all bee not yet come asfer as
Duresme, and also that the wether hath bee soo mervelously reyne
whiche hath so raysed the waters that noo man maye pas from hens
northward.
<P 230>
And also for that I was not advertised that the Duke was set
forewards, nor knowing whiche waye he wold hold, I have stopped
thos that came furste in this towne and bitwene this and Morpath
and Hexham, and th'oders abouts Duresme. And tomorowe my Lorde
Marques shall marche to Anwike, and with hym my lord Darcy and
many others, to th'entente that and the Duke wold send in any
good nombre to overrun the contre they maye be redy to defend
the same. And I with the reste woll not marche past Morpath
myself, and thos nowe that bee at Duresme unto this towne, unto
the tyme I shall suerly know whether he woll goo to
th'Esteborder or the Weste. For if I shuld goo any further I
shuld bee compelled to retorne for lak of vitell: for I can get
no cariage in maner for money too cary any with me. Assuering
your Grace that I think it not possible the Duke can bring his
Ordinaunce unto Norham, Wark, or Carlizle before Mondaye, though
it reyned no more unto that tyme, the waters bee nowe soo
marvelously greate that no man leving hath seen them greatter;
but unto Berwicke he maye well com upon the ferther side of the
water. Praying God to send hym thither, where I truste he shall
not onely consume his tyme in vayne, somany good men nowe being
within the Towne, but alsoo we comyng thidder shall have some
reasonable store of vitell, and shalbe
<P 231>
able to geve batayle at our advantage. Fynally assure your Grace
I and all others here bee all aferde of one thing that he shall
not dare abide us. And grete pitie it were that the Kingis
Highnes shuld spend thus moche money withoute batayle. And, as I
think if he abide us we shall mete about Tuysdaye nexte.
   He doth make grete booste off the londyng off Richard de la
Pole in Scotlond assewryng the Lords off Scotlond that he shall
have gret help in this realme, wherfor after my poure opinion it
wer well done Sir Riz ap Thomas wer warned to be in a redynes,
for the seid Duc seith he shall londe in Wales. Iff your Grace
know any man suspect I dout not ye woll provyde that he shall
not shyp away. I know no man lyvyng that I shuld mystrust, but
he hath spoken so largely and dayle doth, that I know not what
to thynk.
   Most humble besechyng your Grace that and I fortewne to
myscary in this Journey, to be gode lord to my poure chylderne,
assewryng your Grace that without the Kyng's gracious favour and
your Grace's shewed unto them, they shalbe undone. For I have
spent somoch to serve the Kyng's Hyghnes, that, iff God do now
his plesure off me, I shall leve them the pourest noblemanny's
childerne that died in this realme thes xl. yers; havyng neyther
goods nor fote off londe to put in feofment to do them gode
after me. And therfor most humble I beseche Your Grace to be
gode and gracious Lord to them, for my poure
<P 232>
service done in tymes past. Scribled the xxiij. day off October
at xj. at nyght.
   Yo=rs=. most bownden
   T. Surrey.
To my Lord Legats good Grace.

<Q OR1 1523 T2HOWARD>
<A THOMAS HOWARD 2>
<G M>
<P 232>
[} [\LETTER LXXXII. LORD SURREY TO KING HENRY THE EIGHTH.\] }] 
   Plesith it your Highnes to be advertised that upon Satirdaye
at night the Duke of Albany with a greate puysance brought his
ordynaunce unto Werk, on the fer side of Twede, upon Scotland
side, and began to shote right sore upon Sondaye by the breke of
daye, and so contynued all that daye and Mondaye. And whiche
tyme I being at Holy Island, vij. myles from Berwike, was
advertised of the same at seven a clok at night the said
Sondaye; and incontynente sent Lettres to my lord Cardynalls
company, my lord of Northumberland, my lord of Westmoreland at
Sainte Cutberts baner lying at Anwike and thereabouts, and in
likewise to my lord Dacre and other lords and gentilmen lying
abrode in the countre, too mete me at
<P 233>
Barmer wood, fyve myles from Werk on Mondaye, who so ded. And
the seid Monday at iij. a cloke at aftir none, the water of
Twede being soo high that it could not be riden the Duke sent
over ij M. Frenche men in bootis to gif assault to the place,
who with force entred the bas courte, and by Sir William Lizle
captain of the Castell with a hundred with him were right
manfully defended by the space of one houre and an half, without
suffring theym t'entre the Inner Ward; but fynally the seid
Frenchemen entred the Inner warde, whiche perceived by the seid
Sir William and his company frely set upon theym, and not onely
drove theym oute of the Inner warde, but alsoo oute of the Uttir
warde, and slewe of the seid Frenche men x. personys. And so the
seid Frenche men wente over the water; and incontynent the seid
Sir William advertised me of the said assaulte, desiering too
have reskue this daye, or els the place wold be no lenger kepte:
whereof I being advertised by thre a clok this mornyng, avaunced
foreward with the hole army by the breke of daye. And the Duke
hering that I cam towards hym toke away his ordynance, and in
likewise departed hymself with his hoole company, but as yet I
cannot advertise your Grace of trouth howe fer he is goon, but
tomorrowe I doubte not I shall knowe the certentie. Sir I doubte
moche that if he here that I breke this army that he woll
retorne with his
<P 234>
ordynance unto Werk, whiche I feare woll not hold long againste
hym; for and if I had not made newe fortifications of bulwerks
of erthe, it had not be tenable one half daye. I wold it were in
the See, for I knowe not how to get men to remayne in it. Sir
undoubtedly ther was never man departed with more shame nor with
more feare than the Duke hath doon this daye: and
notwithstanding the greate Assemble that he hath made in
Scotland he hath not doon x=s=. worth of hurte within your
Grace's realme, nor never durste hymself entre the same. Sir I
feare me it shall not be possible for me to kepe this Army no
longer togidder; for suche as come oute of the bisshopriche,
this contre, and other places, at their own costs, have spent
all that they have; and with moche difficulte and faire words
have kepte theym here thus long. Notwithstanding I shall doo my
beste to kepe theym togidder unto the tyme that I shall knowe
the Duks army bee perspoiled. Assuering your Grace that maister
Magnus hath but iij. M. marks lefte; and if th'army shuld be
discharged tomorrowe next, I think x M. marks woll not paye that
is owing and conduyte money home. And considering howe
paynefully and with howe good will they have served, it were
pitie they shuld departe withoute having that was promysed
theym, wherfore mooste humble I beseche your Highnes that
convenyent money maye be sente hither with diligence. And if it
come not bifore the departing
<P 235>
hens of th'army, to th'entente they shuld not goo hens groudging
and speking shrodly, I shall delyver theym asmoche as is here
with asmoche more as I maye borowe. And also I shall bynd myself
by my bill signed with myn hand to paye theym asmoche as shalbe
due for the reste; mooste humble besechyng your Highnes to see
me dischardged of the same with convenyente diligence, or els I
shalbe uttirly undoon for ever. Also I beseche your Grace to
send thankfull lettres to suche as have doon good servyce at
this tyme, whos names be conteyned in a bill herein closed: also
lx. iiij=xx=. blanks to be written here to suche as I doo not
remembre the names of: assuering your Grace that in all my lif I
never sawe somany Englishmen in none army nor so well willed as
thees were fro the higheste to the loweste, nor never was
gentilman so moche bounde as I have been this Jorney to all
noblemen, gentilmen, and souldiors; whiche favor they have
shewed me for the greate love they bere to your Highnes, and the
desierous myende they have to doo your Grace service. Written in
the Campe ij. myles from Wark this Tuysday at night.
   Your most humble subject and servant
   T. Surrey.
To the Kings most noble Grace.

<Q OR1 1524 TDACRE>
<A THOMAS LORD DACRE>
<G M>
<P 240>
[} [\LETTER LXXXV. LORD DACRE TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }] 
<P 241>
   My Lorde pleas it your Grace to knowe that this present hour
I am advertised by my secrete espiall out of Scotland that the
Lordes of the same contynueng
<P 242>
to giddres all Witson Weke in Edinburghe were in the Tolbothe of
the same Monday, Tewisday, Wednisday, and Thurysday laste paste
in counseill, and there the Duke of Albany demanded of theim by
his writing certein things articulerly as your Grace may
perceive by theim, with the Lordes aunsweres ensewing; that is
to saye
   Furst the said Duke deasired thre monthes licence of the King
and Lordes to th'intent in that tyme he mought departe in France
and retorne in Scotland again for certain considerations moving
the King and Wele of Scotland, specially for the making of
provision for the defence and susteignyng of the Warres anempt
and against the Kings Highnes our Soveraign Lorde and his
realme, and to knowe what the Frenche Kings parte shulde be, to
the supple of Scotlande; and to that effect deasired a
Commission with Servants of the Kings to passe with hym in
Fraunce for his aunswere, good counseill, and supple to be had
and knowen towards Scotlande. 
   The Lordes aunswered sayeing it was not tyme now for hym to
remeve furth of the Realme, remembring the grete damagies that
the realme and pore subjects had susteigned in his absence past,
and considering that towards the King and Realme apperauntt
grete warres, and also, as they were advertised, the Realme by
all lyklyhode wolde in shorte tyme be preserved by
<P 243>
the Kings Highnes our soverain Lorde and his realme, and seing
the King now at nonage, and he having governaunce of his Realme,
it were not his honor to be absent fro the defence of it. He
aunswered and said he had suche secrete busynes to do with the
Frenche King concernyng the same that he must nedes in his owne
person speke with hym. The Lordes hering the same, graunted hym
the said licence with a commission to oon Maister David Beton, a
clerke, and a harrolde, to departe with hym in Fraunce; which
thre persones ar delivered with powier and departed with him
accordingly.
   Secundely the Duke desired the bande that was maide in Rowane
by the bishop of Dunkelde, the secretary, and the bushop of Ross
to be kept by the King and the Lordes to the Frenche King, and
no peas to be takin with this Realme of Inglande during the time
of his licence; and further in his absens, without the advice of
the French Kyng and hym.
   The Lordes aunswered that the bande made in Rowane they were
contented shulde be kept, so that the Frenche King wolde in the
mean season kepe the bande maide to the King of Scotts; and in
likewise the lordes of Scotlande ar contented to contynew the
warre enduring his licence, and further, unto they had the
Frenche Kings advice, except that the King's
<P 244>
Highnes our Soverain lorde be his maigne power in the mean
season fortuned to invade and pursue Scotland, whiche Scotland
were not able to resiste, that then he being absent, (of force)
they must neds take peas with our said Soverain and his Realme.
   Thirdly the Duke desired the Quene and the Lordes to holde
the King in the Castell of Strivelying, and boundes divised for
hym afore, to his retorne in Scotland again, binding the Quene
neither to confederate with the Kings Highnes our said Soverain
lorde nor to consent to peas.
   To the which deasires the Quene denyed hym in a parte, saing
if he yode awaye she must neds do for her self: and inlikewise
the lordes said, promising to do their best to cause hym kepe
in, so farr as they might solicite hym.
   Fourthly the Duke deasired that Grisels, a Frenchman, his
servant, might remaine in Scotland as Treasourer of the same,
having th'auctoritye of his office whiles his retorne again in
Scotlande, and nothing to be done or consented unto in any
greate mattiers unto they had his advice.
   The Lordes aunswered, saing, what servant so ever he pleased
to leif theim shulde be welcum, but they thought not suche a man
mete for that office.
   Fiftly the Duke deasired that the Quene shulde be obeyed in
all her rights.
<P 245>
   The Lordes aunswered and said the pleasure and service that
they might do shulde be at her commandement.
   Sextly and laste of all the Duke deasired to have and borrow
of the Lordes forty thousand Crownes of the Son to furnishe hym
certein wages, and for the furnishing of his Shippes, and he to
deliver the same again to the merchands of Scotlande in the
Towne of Deipe.
   The Lordes maide aunswer herunto they coude not make hym any
siche som of money: and said, if he wold remaigne with them to
the suppleying of the warres, thay shulde ware with hym their
bodies and goodes.
   Wherupon the same Duke having all the Lordes afore hym on
Fridaye last paste tooke leve of theim and rode that night to
Lithguo: on Satturday to Stryveling, and there remaigned
Sondaye, taking his leif of the King and Quene: and determined
to be in Glasgue yesterdaye: and this Tewisday to Dumbretain,
where as he wol take shippe if the wynde wol serve hym.
   Immediatly aftre he be entred ship, and sailed out of sight
frome Dumbretayn, I am promised to be surely and diligently
advertised therof; and if there be any retorne of hym your Grace
shalbe certefied accordingly,
<P 246>
God willing, who preserve your Grace. At Whittingham this last
daye of May at iij. of the clok in the mornyng.
   Yowrs to hyes serves
   Thomas Dacre.
To my Lord Legats Grace.

<Q OR1 1524 TDACRE>
<A THOMAS LORD DACRE>
<G M>
<P 246>
[} [\LETTER LXXXVI. LORD DACRE TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }] 
   My Lord, pleas it your Grace to be ascerteyned, according to
my former advertisements made unto your Grace of the Duc of
Albanies departure out of Scotland; so it was at his said
departure the Lordes of Scotland and he did not aggre verey
well: for his intente and purpose was to have gone with a
certein nombre unto the Isle of Man, and had viteilled his
shippes and made all other provisions for the same accordingly.
And whan it came to the poincte of his departing, all those that
had promised to go with hym satt downe and refused the Jorney.
Albeit of trouthe, the lordes of Scotland ar strately bounde and
sworne to stik still at the said Duks opynyon and the League
<P 247>
of France unto the laste daye of Auguste next comyng, at which
daye he hath promised to retorne into Scotland; and, if he fale
therof, he shalbe clerely exempted from all his auctoritie in
Scotland. And I am surely enformed that the said Lordes of
Scotland woll kepe their promisse to the said Duc, and nothing
do contrary the same for the tyme, except it be by force and
compulsion. Albeit I am inlikewise enformed, and verely truste,
that if it so fortune that the said Duc breke his promisse, and
cum not again at his appoincted daye, the said Lordes and
counseill of Scotland woll not onely leave his wayes, and
exclude hym clerely from all his auctoritie which he hath in
Scotland, but also semblably provide so that they may have peax
with the Kings Highnes by their owne meanes; and geve over all
bands, leages, and promises that are confermed betwene theim and
the Frenche King.
   Wherfore seyng that the said lords of Scotland woll make
persuyte to the King's Highnes for peax or treux now in the Ducs
absence, without it be for a surceace of warre to be taken
betwixt the wardeins upon the Bordors for a season, (which is
only for their and the Duks commoditie,) right necessarie and
requisite it is that the Kings Highnes and your Grace devise a
substanciall order what is beste to be done for their annoyance
now in the moste commodious tyme of the yere: for, according as
I have declared unto your Grace in my former writings, it is but
small exployt
<P 248>
that I can do with the nombre of men that lie now here in
garnyson, remembring how the Bordors of Scotland have bene
contynually destroyed sens the warres beganne. So that there is
no rode that can be made upon the said Bordors with so small a
nombre to the Kings honor. Howbeit I assure your Grace, for it
that we might do, I have holden them in quik occupation, making
of excourses contynually. And for proif that the frontors of the
Bordors of Scotland ar in maner destroyed, now lately the
viij=th=. day of this present monthe Sir William Evre lieutenant
of the Middill Merchies, accumpanied with one thousand men and
moo, made a Jorney into Scotland, and did verey well, and seased
and brought awey above viij=c=. nowte with many horses and othr
catall, as shepe, and gate to a great nombre, and miche insight,
which I assure your Grace they did fetche xvj. myles within the
grounde of Scotland. And in likewise my son, and my broder Sir
Cristofer Dacre (accumpanied with a parte of the Weste marchies)
the same tyme made an oder Jorney into Scotland, and there
seased and gat nigh upon a thousand nowte, and miche oder
catall, whiche they did fetche xx. myles within the grounde of
Scotland. And so your Grace may perceive that it is litill that
we can do but only kepe the Bordors from excourses, though the
Kings Highnes be at grete charge; seing that litill or nothinge
is lefte upon the
<P 249>
frontors of Scotland without it be parte of ald Howses wherof
the thak and covereings ar taken awey, bireason wherof they
cannot be brint as my lord Treasurer can shew your Grace. And
therefore under correction of your Grace if it be the Kings
pleasure and Yours (as I trust it is) that sharp warre be made
upon Scotland, provision must be made for the same now in tyme;
and not only the number of five or six thousand men to be putt
in arredines as nighehande the Bordors as may be conveniently,
to cum forward at diverse tymes whan they shalbe called upon,
for making of certen grete rodes; and alwey, after a grete rode
made to have wagies for that tyme only and to departe, and
retorne to an order as they shalbe called upon; but also
ordinance and horses to drawe the same with all oder necessaries
therunto belonging to be made redy accordingly. For surely to
dryve the tyme as we do, leving in defense, and doing but small
hurt to the Kings enemyes, it is nothing to the honor of his
Highnes, and far lesse to his prouffite as your Grace may well
perceive. And if the Kings Highnes and your Grace woll not take
this ordre, or othr like ordre, for oppressing of the said
Scotts, then (under your Grace's correction) best it is that a
surcease of Werre be taken by the wardeins for a season, which I
am sure the Lordes of Scotland woll specially deasire, because
it is for their owne commoditie, and after
<P 250>
that, I trust, the Chauncellare of Scotlande (with whome the Duc
hath left his hole auctoritie) wolde be contented to mete at the
bordors any honorable person that the King's Highnes and your
Grace wold appointe, for to common and speke of peax and
tranquillitie to be had betwene thes two realmes, whereunto he
hath alwey allegied that he is right well affectionate and
mynded. And if a surceace of werre were taken wherby that the
bordors of Scotland might be plenisshed, and the estats of the
realme gete prouffite (which they now lak), percaase they shuld
fynde it so swete that they wold be wel advised or they brak
agian aithr for the pleasour of the Frenche King, the Duc of
Albany, or of any oder. As knoweth the Holy Trinite who preserve
Your Grace. At Hexham the xj=th=. day of Junii.
   Yowrs with hys serves
   Thomas Dacre.

<Q OR1 1520S HENRY8>
<A HENRY VIII>
<G M>
<P 269>
[} [\LETTER XCII. KING HENRY THE EIGHTH TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }]
   Myne awne good Cardinall, I recomande me unto you with all my
hart, and thanke yow for the grette payne and labour that yow do
dayly take in my bysynes and maters, desyryng yow (that wen yow
have well establyshyd them) to take summe pastyme and comfort,
to the intent yow may the longer endure to serve us; for allways
payne can nott be induryd. Surly yow have so substancyally
orderyd oure maters bothe off thys syde the See and byonde that
in myne oppynyon lityll or nothyng can be addyd; nevertheles,
accordyng
<P 270>
to your desyre, I do send yow myne oppynyon by thys berar, the
refformacion whereoff I do remytte to yow and the remnante off
our trusty consellers, whyche I am sure wyll substantyally loke
on hyt. As tochyng the mater that Syr Wyllyam Says broght answar
off, I am well contentyd with what order so ever yow do take in
itt. The Quene my wyff hath desyryd me to make har most harty
recommendations to yow, as to hym that she lovethe very well,
and both she and I wolde knowe fayne when yow wyll repayre to
us. No more to yow att thys tyme bot that with God's helpe I
trust we shall dysspoynte oure enymys off theyre intendyd
purpose. Wryttyn with the hand of your lovyng master
   Henry, R.
To My Lorde Cardinall.

<Q OR1 1520S MYTUDOR>
<A MARY QUEEN OF FRANCE>
<G F>
<P 304>
[} [\LETTER XCIX. MARY THE FRENCH QUEEN TO HER BROTHER K. HEN.
VIII=TH=.\] }] 
   My most derest and best belowyd brother I humbly recommend vn
to yowr grace. Sir so yt tys that I have bene very seke and eke
atons for the wyche I was fayne to sende for Master Peter the
fesysyon for to have hoplen me of the dessays that I haue. Howbe
yt I am rathar wors than better. Were for I trowst showrly to
come vp to Londone with my Lord. For and yf I shold tary here I
am sowr I shold never asspeare the sekenys that I haue. Wer for,
Sir, I wolde be the gladther a grete dele to com thether, by
cawse I wold be glad to se yowr grace, the wyche I do thyncke
long for to do; for I haue bene a grete wyle out of yowr syte:
and now I thowst I shal not be so long agene: for the syte of
yowr grace ys to me the grettys comforte to me that may be
possybel. No
<P 305>
more to your grace at thys tyme, bwt I pray God send yow yowr
hartys dessyr, and showrly to the syte of yow.
   by yowr lowyng suster
   Mary the Frenche Qu ...

<Q OR1 1528 ABOLEYN>
<A ANNE BOLEYN>
<G F>
<P 305>
[} [\LETTER C. ANNE BOLEYN TO CARDINAL WOLSEY.\] }] 
   My Lord, in my most humblyst wyse that my powuer hart can
thynke I do thanke your Grace for your kynd Letter, and for
youer rych and goodly present, the whyche I shall never be able
to desarve wyth owt your gret helpe, of the whyche I have
hetherto hade so grete plente that all the dayes of my lyfe I am
moaste bownd [{of{] all creators next the Kyngs Grace
<P 306>
to love and serve your Grace, of the whyche I besyche yo[{u
never{] to dowte that ever I shalle vary frome this thought as
long a[{s ony bre{]the is in my body. And as tochyng your Graces
troble with the Swet [{I thanke o{]wer Lorde that them that I
desyerd and prayed for ar sca[{pyd, and th{]at is the Kyng and
you. Not doughthyng bot that God [{has preser{]vyd you bothe for
grete cawsys knowen allonly of his hy[{gh wysdom{]e. And as for
the commyng of the Legate, I desyer that moche; [{and yf it be
Godds{] pleasor I pray hym to send this matter shortly to [{a
good ende{] : and then I trust my Lord to recompence part of
your gr[{ete panys the whych{] I must requyer you in the meane
tyme to excepte [{my good wyll in t{]he stede of the power, the
whyche must prosede partly f[{rom you as ower Lo{]urd knoweth to
whom I be syche to sende you lon[{ge lyfe with continew{]ance in
honor. Wrytten wyth the hande of her th[{at is most bound to
be{]
   You[{r humble and{]
   obed[{yent servante
   Anne Boleyn.{]



<B STONOR>

[^SAMPLE 1 = THE STONOR LETTERS AND PAPERS, 1290-1483, VOL. I-
II. ED. BY KINGSFORD, CHARLES LETHBRIDGE. CAMDEN THIRD SERIES
29, 30. 1919.
SAMPLE 2 = SUPPLEMENTARY STONOR LETTERS AND PAPERS, 1314-1482.
ED. BY KINGSFORD, CHARLES LETHBRIDGE. CAMDEN MISCELLANY 13.
CAMDEN THIRD SERIES 34. 1924. (REFERRED TO AS VOL. 3 IN PAGE
NUMBER CODING.)^]

<S SAMPLE 1>
<Q STO 1424 T1STONOR>
<A THOMAS STONOR1>
<G M>
<P I,38>
[} [\46. THOMAS STONOR TO (SIR JOHN FORTESCUE)\] }]
[\30 October, 1424\]
<P I,39>
   Ryth welle belovyd syr, I grete yow well, doyng yow to
undurstonde +tath yowre son Jon and I beth fully acorded as
towchyng to the ferme of the Maner off Ermyngton, as hys
endenturys +terof beth enseylyd. And ye shall have +te lawe
Court of Mychellmasse last passed. Fur+turmore I send yow be the
berer of +tys letter endenturys betwene yowre sone Rychard and
my feffeys, +te wyche ben made be avyse and asent of yowre son
Jon: prayinge yow that ye delyver nat the party of +te same
endenturys enselyd be my feffeys into the tyme that yowre sone
Rychard have enselyd hys party of the same endenturys: and
thanne hys party soo enselyd that ye delyver sesyng unto the
same Rychard and hys wyff aftyr the fourme of the endenturys: to
wyche endenturys lakketh +te selyng of my uncle Belknap, wyche
shall ensele +tem whanne he com fro beyonde see. And seeth that
yowre forseyde son Rychard duly ensele +te same endenture, for
yowre son Jonys honestie hanketh theron. And as towchyng the
warde of Wytburyes heyr, and of +te londys, the wyche longen to
me, I pray yow that ye soo see +terto that my ryth be saved,
that I and my frendus schull have yow thonke therfore. And yf ye
see that hyt may lawfully be sesyd +tath ye sesed [\hyt
AFTERWARDS ERASED\] as my trust ys in yow. Nomore y wryte unto
yow at thys tyme, but the holy gost have yow in hys kepyng.
I-wrytte at London the Monday nexte before alle-halwenday. 
   By Thomas Stonore.
[\NO ENDORSEMENT.\]

<Q STO 1420S? ASUDELEY>
<A ALYS, LADY SUDELEY>
<G F>
<P I,47>
[} [\53. ALYS, LADY SUDELEY TO THOMAS STONOR\] }]
[\before 1431\]
   Right trusty and entierly welbeloved frend y commaund me unto
you: and, where as y of singler trust in you have before this
enfeffed you with other in my Maners, londes and tenements
withyn dyvers shires, wole and hertely prey you, for gret
consideracions and causes touching my worship and gret profyt,
that ye seale the deedes, made yn youre name and other, of the
seid Maners to suche persons as be named in the same, wheche
seid deedes the berer of this shall shewe unto you, as my full
trust ys and hathe be unto you, like as the berer hereof shall
enfourme you: to whom y prey you geve credence. And, sir, yf
ther be anything that y may do for you in any mater in tyme
comyng, y wole do yt with all myn hert, and that knoweth God,
who have you in his blessed kepyng. Wreten at Sudely the iiij
day of Avrell.
   Alys, lady Sudeley.
   To the worshipfull and my trusty frend Thomas Stoner. 

<Q STO 1462 JFRENDE>
<A JOHN FRENDE>
<G M>
<P I,55>
[} [\63. JOHN FRENDE TO THOMAS STONOR\] }]
[\? April, 1462\]
   Right worshipfull maister, I comaunde me unto yov: praying
yov to sende me word by your letter where ye wil come in to
Devenshire to abide other no &c: and what I shall do with the
corne, syder, and wyne: yf ye come nought, hit were best, me
semeth, that hit were sold betyme &c. Also tenentes of Modbury,
that is to sey John Torryng
<P I,56>
and other, have made an ende with Ric. Fortescu in your defaute,
understondyng to them that ye wold have come, and kepe not your
promise at no tyme &c. Item, waen Ric. Fortescu was there in
lente nov last past he sende to Modbury by John Saunder seyng,
that he hadde recoveryd of Thomas Stonore a C. li: and wel a
wist they schuld be cast in suche daunger as they schuld never
abere: and for fere of suche langage the seid Torryng and other
have made there ende under this condicion, what they schall
paie, though &c hit passe ayenst them. Item, the mede I kepe in
your honde unto tyme ye sende me word what I schall do. Item, I
do yov to wete that my maister Drayton hath sende me word that I
schulde fylle a grete parte of the Southwode: I pray yov sende
me word where hit be your will or noo.
   By John Frende of Ermyngton, Boucher.
   To my worshipful maister Tho. Stonor in hast.
[^LIST OF ENDORSED NAMES OMITTED^]

<Q STO 1462 JFRENDE>
<A JOHN FRENDE>
<G M>
<P I,56>
[} [\64. JOHN FRENDE TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\c. 1462\]
   Right worshipfull maister, I recomaunde me unto yov: letyng
yov wete that Thomas Baron, John Peperell, the son of Robert
Peperell, mauneseth me dayly, and put me in suche fere of my
lyffe, that with other the servauntes of Ric. Fortescu, that I
dere not go to cherche ne 
<P I,57>
to chepyng. Also now late the seid Baron and Peperell have
sklaunder me that I schuld sende divers men to the hous of the
seid Thomas; and ther and at that tyme the seid persons, that is
to wete John Gune, John Cleveff and other, schuld take theefly
xxvj. s. viij. d. of the godis of the seid John Peperell, vj
spones of silver of the godis of Thomas Barons, and a girdell
with silver harnes of his susters, and divers polen, and brynge
althis to the hous of John Frende of Ermyngton: and there and at
that tyme then schuld recette: uppon the whiche sklaunder and
untrue noyse the seid John Frende hath made his purge with meny
worshippfull gentilmen and gode yoman. Wherefore I pray yov that
ye see a meane that I may be in ese: for hit is worse than ever
hit was: for ye have seid many tymes that ye wold come thether,
and dwelle ther: and that thay putteth in uterance daily that we
schalbe undowe, for ye nel never come to helpe us. Also I pray
yov that my maister Drayton may se this letter, and be enformyd
thereof. And also I pray yov to take hede above, and make gode
wacche for Thomas Baron. And Thomas Horne bethe come uppe to
London a fote, for make labour ayenst me. Also but ye come and
defende me, I wille do the service no lengher, for I may not ne
dernot. And for the sege for my maisteres is made after your
device.
   By your servaunt John Frende of Ermyngton.
   To Thomas Stonor, squyer, in hast.

<Q STO 1462 THAMPTON>
<A THOMAS HAMPTON>
<G M>
<P I,57>
[} [\65. THOMAS HAMPTON TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\1462\] 
<P I,58>
   Rytht wurschypfull and my tender welbelovyd Cosyn, I
recommaunde me to yow: letyng yow wyte +tat my Suster Swete
recommaundyth her to yow, and hertyly thankyth yow for her
chylderyn, and so do I as well for owr venyson. Syr, sche prayth
yow specyally to make your effectuell labor un[{to{] the parson
of Sylverton +tat he wull in weye of Crystes charyte loke up all
suche evydens as in eny wyse may make eny proffe Thomas to be
+te son of Syr Water and Jahne his ffurst wyff. Of Margete and
Isabell: Margete was weddyd un[{to{] John Hunteley: Isabell was
weddyd unto John Popham. That +tese persons, all or some of
+teyse wer +te chyldryn of +te seyde syr Water and Jahne: lete
hym schewe hit in the wey of good and of concyens. +Te parson,
+te Kynges Chapeleyn, when he was with hym sye a full fayre Dede
and Sealle of Armys: and when +te parson of Sylverton sende his
ffolke to London, +tey wulde in nowyse schew +tat dede. And
+tyff my Suster Swete mochte hafe had mony at here wyll, the
parson schulde haf com over to yow; hit wulde nat be. Moreover,
syr, we haf a ffyn reryd unto Syr Water and Jahne terme of +ter
lyvys, +te rem. +terof unto Thomas, +te son of Jahne, and thit
[\SIC\] he was +te son of +tem bo+te, of Domerz and Morton: but
Wykes wuld haf +te ffyn servyd in Stapulham, because hit ys in
+te same parische, surmyttyng +tat Jahne schulde furst hafe ben
weddyd unto Amaryke Northlode, and he to be ffader to +te sayde
Thomas. And for certeyne Stapulham came never by +te ffyn, +te
wyche was reryd A=o= xxiiij Regis E. iij: but by a latter
tytull. Lete hym geder all +te dedys of Stapulham to geder, +tat
hit may be provyd +tat hit ys no parcell of +te ffyn: and lete
+tem be schewyd, and by here trouth to haf all +te dedes +tat
consernyth here enherytaunse +tat he hath in his kepyng: sche
wull +tat he haf Stapulham as sure &c., as we all can make it.
   Moreover, Syr, I wryte aparte +tat hit may be kette away,
+tyff ye lust to schew +tis above unto +te parson of Sylverton.
The case was soo when my Suster Swete man schulde go sche kowth
haf no money as for +te ffyndyng of +te Offyces, unneth to make
hym bryng yow +tis my sympyl byll. Nevyrthelese here we praye
yow that ye make some redy apoyntement with the Eschetor, +tat
he wull not fayle yow, but be redy at suche tyme as ye and we
schall sende unto hym both to haf hit fond yn +te Com. of Suth.
as well as in Wylschere: and what he wull haf to ffynde hit in
on, and what in the to+ter Schyre: for per case +te on schall
suffyse. Ano+ter poynte, +tat ys we kepte not sende +te Dede
aboute
<P I,59> 
into +te tyme hit were enrowlyd, for drede of losyng &c., Syr,
we haf ffonde a gentylmanly thynge, a copy of +te Kynges
Recordes +tat Thomas, ffader to Syr Th., was seysyd and dyde
seasyd A=o= regis H. iiij=ti= ij=o=, the wyche schall make owr
ffyn gode. And so thys fondyn, he most breff Margete, Suster to
Th., bastard, wych was ffader to Syr Th. Nomore to yow at +tis
tyme: but almythty Godd haf yow in kepyng. Amen.
   By your owne Thomas Hampton.
   To my ryght wurschypfull Thomas Stonor, be +tis delyvered. 

<Q STO 1462? THAMPTON>
<A THOMAS HAMPTON>
<G M>
<P I,59>
[} [\67. THOMAS HAMPTON TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\31 Aug. (1462)\] 
<P I,60> 
   Rythe wurschypf[{ull Co{]syn, I recommaunde me to yow, letyng
yow understande +tat my Suster Swete ffulherteyly dayly praying
Godd for yourre gode. S[{yr, sche recomaunds{] her to yow,
s[{pec{]yally prayng yow to do your tender dyligens as unto the
parson of Sylverton for +te hafyng of p[{rofe . . .{] . Syr, ye
were no rather gon fro my house but +te parsons man came unto us
and lete my Suster understande +tat his mayster had ff[{ound{]
fayre evydens under seale to profe Thomas to be sone of syr
Water Romsey and Jahne, his ffurst wyff, and with +tat sche wuld
ordeyne a suffycyaunte persone to be bounde with here in maner
and forme, as we ben boundyn and as ye must nedys see: ffor +te
sayde Obligacion moste nedys be delyveryd by your hands or by
+te hand of Phylyp Pymme acordyng to an endenture made betwene
+te parson man and [{. . . Mo{]reover, Syr, in eny wyse +tat we
may haf notyse of +te parson what maner tytull Wykes made ffor
Stapulham ayenst hym and ayenste Syr J. Beynton, Knyth, and thyf
hit were by d[{er{]ayng, +tat in eny wyse +tat we may haf a
copye of hit; and thyf hit be by wey of ple, +tat we may haf +te
Record and what yere hit was, and what terme: and +tat +te
parson wull stere theym +tat were of Beyntons Counsell and his
to be of owr Counsell for owr mony. And also, Syr, I lete yow
wyte +ter schall no more be don to +te offyse ffyndyng in no
wyse. Hyth wat ye may +tat ye were wyth uns, ye schall
understande a beter meane &c. on. Remembre . . . my lord of
Suthfolke wull be in the mater and he be made on of +te ffeffes,
as ye wull desyr hym ye or naye, or m . . . ch on as ye dar
truste: the mater ys beter +ten we understode, a grete dell,
+tankyd be Godd. No more to yow at +tis tyme, but he +tat made
both yow and me preserve us in perpetuyte, Amen.
   Wrytyn at London in Our Palys of the Flete, +te laste daye of
August.
   By your owne Thomas Hampton.
   Gode syr, I pray yow remembre Mowne in your comyng homward
+tat he woll be my gode Cosyn, +ter ys non o+ter mene, but +te
Kyng wull haf mony me semyth by Fowler.
   Unto my ryght Wurshypfull Cosyn, Thomas Stonor, be thys
delyveryd in hast.

<Q STO 1462? HUNTON>
<A HUGH UNTON>
<G M>
<P I,61> 
[} [\68. H. UNTON TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\? 1462\] 
   Right worshipfull Maister, I recommaunde me unto you &c. And
thanket be God that my Maistres is amendet. Letyng you wete,
Syr, that Maister Mylle and I have ben dayly with Maister Fouler
and Maister Danvers, and as yet Nassh is not comyn. And syr, as
for Wykes, he is not here, nor on Kene nayther. And so Hampden
of Kymbell movet us that ye shuld have had all Wykes landez in
your hand, and have assignet old Wykes a certeynte to lyf apon;
but I supposet ye wold not so, and I durst take opon to chaunge
your opynyon. Mayster Mylle wold ye shuld have take an annuite
of xl. s. yerly of old Wykes and his wif, and yong Wykes and his
wyf, and of all the feffez: bot I supposet ye wold not so, for
by cause of the penalte of the payment of the xl. s. yerly. And
I told Hampden, withoute we dro to an end that ye wold execute
your exigent ayeynest yong Wykes: and so I trowe we shall draw
to an end. And all myghty God have you in kepyng.
   Your owne servaunt H. Unton.
   To my right worshipfull Maister, Thomas Stonore.

<Q STO 1463 JSTONOR>
<A JANE STONOR>
<G F>
<P I,62>
[} [\70. JANE STONOR TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\2nd August, 1463\] 
   Syr, I recommende me to +gow. Plesyth +gow to wete +tat upon
Wednesday last passyd my cousin Langforth ys sone browthe +gow a
privy sele, and to all +te jentylmen off +te schyre. So I
resseyved sore akenyn my wyll. Y +tesyryd of hym to have kept
ytt stylle, for +ge were not at home: butt he wold nott so doo,
but counsellyd me to sendyd +gow in all hast. And he promysys me
+tat he wold informe +te kyng +tat +ge were not at home, and he
told me +tat upon +te Thursday folwyng +te kyng remevyth
northward, and purposyth into Schottland, ef +ten he com akeyn.
For 
<P I,63>
+tat o+ter party hathe bysechyd +te castell +tat was late
rescuyd, and +ter ys of +tam moo +ten V. m., as +te Kynge hath
word. Other tydynges y can none send: but y beseke +te holy gost
be +gour gyde. I-wrytyn at Stonor +te Tuesday after seint Annis
day.
   Yowr owyn J. S.

<Q STO 1465 THAMPDEN>
<X THOMAS HAMPDEN>
<P I,69>
[} [\75. THOMAS AND MARGERY HAMPDEN TO THOMAS STONOR\] }]
[^MARGERY HAMPDEN'S POSTSCRIPT FOLLOWS AS A SEPARATE LETTER^]
[\c. 1465\]
   Ryght worchepefull cossyn, y recommand me unto yow: and y
pray yow, asse y may do any theyng to yowr plessur, that +ge
wolle grant me
<P I,70> 
the nexte avoydanys that ffallethe yow of any benyffys off
yowrys that ys off valew off xx. li., or +geffe hyt be better
then xx. markes; and y werr be hold unto yow, +geffe hyt lyke
yow to do sso moche ffor me, and allso +ge bynde me to do ffor
yow yn that that yn me ys: y wysse, Cossyn, y have a beneffysse
that ther hathe benne prest ther yn at my unkyll your faderys
dessyr and yowrys alle moste theys xl. wynter, and onne I putte
yn at yowr dessir my selffe. Y wryte unto yow for a jantylmane,
that I darr promysse yow schall do yow tru servysse and plesurr,
and he ys a worchepeffull man and a well rulede, prayng yow to
sende me a answerr by wrytyng. And allmyty God have yow yn ys
kepyng, and all yowrys. Y beseche yow thys sympyll byll may
recommand me unto my cossyn your wyffe. Y-wrytyn at Hampden onne
Newyerys day.
   Your cossyn T. Hampden off Hampden.

<Q STO 1465 MHAMPDEN>
<X MARGERY HAMPDEN>
<P I,70>
[^MARGERY HAMPDEN'S POSTSCRIPT TO THOMAS HAMPDEN'S LETTER NUMBER
75^]
   Cossyne, I recomaund me untoo yow, and I beche yow of yowre
gode cossyne hode yn +te performyng off my husbondes dessyr &c.
Cossyne, and +ge had desyred me or myne soo ofte as I have
desyred yow and my cossyns, yowr sones, I wold have sene yow
oftener. I wesse, cossyne, het greveth me &c. Ther may no man
hold +tat woll awaye: and ther for I moste take het as weele as
I can, and thenketh thes delyng under wissedome ne kyndnes all
thyngys consederbred to be soo strange &c.
   To my right worchepefull cossyn, T. Stonore.

<Q STO 1465 THAMPTON>
<A THOMAS HAMPTON>
<G M>
<P I,70> 
[} [\76. THOMAS HAMPTON TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\c. 1465\] 
   After almaner of due recommendaciouns, in my most tender wyse
I recommaunde me to yow. S[{yr ...{] haf knowlyche whether +te
sute be takyn ayenst Will. Tystede ye or nay, and W . . . for as
hit was law, tolde me he scholde sey he sette not +ter by: What
hit menyth
<P I,71> 
I can not sey. My moder, my wyf, and all my douchters, your pore
kynnyswymmen, tenderly recommaundyn +tem to yow, of whos
preferment I pray yow to haf rememberaunce, +tyf eny fortune may
grow in eny plase. Syr, I haf late been in the Counte of
Stafford with my Cosyn John Hampton, sometyme Squier for +te
body with Kynge H., and in my +ter beyng he hath made estate of
xl. markes of his lond, and takyn estate of me ayen ther of his
lyff and of his wyffes, +te remaynder to me and to myn heyres,
with all +te evydens acordyng, where of I haf the more parte at
home, wyche +tey schall enyoye with al o+ter of my londes. Syr,
when and what tyme we schall see yow and my cosyn W., I pray yow
sende me worde. Syr, +tat tyme I haf worde by my Cosyn Waller,
brynger of +tis my sympull byll, Gode Syr, whether Palmer be
delynge ge . . . ye, and how my Suster Swete doth. No more at
+tis tyme, but almythty godde have yn hys kepyng, Amen.
   By your owne T. Hampton.
   To my Rythe Wurshypfull Cosyn, T. Stonor, be Wylyam be +tis
delyveryd.

<Q STO 1466? JYEME>
<A JOHN YEME>
<G M>
<P I,77>
[} [\81. JOHN YEME TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\11 June (? 1466)\] 
   Rygth Reverent Mayster, y recomand me unto yowe, desyryng to
here of yower wellefare and prosperyte of body and sawle,
besekyng Almy+gthy Jhesu preservy hit unto his plesure and to
yower worly worschyppe and herte ys desyre. Furdermore, as for
the accion of sewryte of pese, the wycche Thomas Horne hathe
ayenst me, y have aperyd therto and have y-putte yn iij
seuryteys, John Kyrton ys on, John Frende of Seynte Jely's
parysche ys the secunde, and a cosyn of myn ys the thirde. And y
hadde myche labur to gete me a weye. Fudermore, Walter Frende
recomandes hym to yower good maisterchyppe, and he wolle pray
yowe to sende hym worde wher to Mylle of Ermyngton schall be
y-koweryn with stone or strawe, and wher he schall ordeyne any
haye ayenst yower comyng. Y wold have come home to your
maisterchyppe, but y have y-taryd vij dayys yn London apon you:
for the osteler tellyd me that ye wolde have y-be ther atte the
<P I,78>
begynnyng of the terme. All so y have y-bofte me a hors atte
London, for y loste my hors ful falsly and untreuly apon the
waye, as I tryste to Godde to enforme yower maysterchyppe and
ever y may speke with yowe. And y have y-spende mycche mony to
gete me awaye fro the Marschall ys warde: for y was comyttyd
ynto his warde, but yette y thanke Godde and ffrende men for.
All so Ric. Fortescu ffaryth ffowle with Walter Frende and me,
and layyth his men yn awayte to murder me when y was laste atte
Ermyngton atte Corte: and all ys for by cawse y wolde notte
suffry hym to have his yntente at Plympton Corte: but y tryste
he schal never have non yntente ayenste them that he sewyth
ther. And as for the Corte of Tremeton, y have mycche laburr
ther; but yette y have notte geffe no ple ther, for he ys
asoynyd ij tymys a rewe yn his oune pleynte. And that sawe y
never yn no place but ther: but that ys Menwynnycke, a felow of
Corte of his, ys doyng, the whycche ys Steward ther. No more to
yowe atte thys tyme. And Jhesu preservy yow yn his blessyd
kepyng, Amen. Y-wrytyn atte London on Seynte Barnebe y Evyn yn
all haste. 
   By yower pore servant John Yeme.
   To my Reverent Mayster Thomas Stonor, Esquyer, thys letter be
y-dylyveryd in all haste.

<Q STO 1466? HFORSTER>
<A HUMPHREY FORSTER>
<G M>
<P I,93>
[} [\87. HUMPHREY FORSTER TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\21 October (1466)\] 
   Ryght worshypfull and my goode kynde brother, in my most
feythefull wyse I recommaunde me to yowe: and liketh yow to be
remembrid to commune with the Eschetour of Bokyngham shire for
the wrytte of (\diem clausit extremum\) of my brother Saquevile,
whom God assoyle: and +tat ye like to wryte unto me as ye fynde
hym disposed: for I ensure yowe I have communed with your
worshipfull and weldisposed Suster Saquevile as for suche estate
as shulde be made unto your doughter and Rokes' sone, wherin I
fynde her as well disposed as ye wold desire your self, so +tat
her husbondes wille be not broken ne she hurte duryng her lyff.
Brother, I dowte not ye shall have worship of her grete sadnesse
and +te vertuous disposicion +tat she is of &c.: hit were to
grete pite to put hir to trowble or charge to cause her to
change from +te disposision +tat she is fully astablisshed to.
My goode brother, yef it please yowe ferthermore to remembre of
+te letter my lord wrote unto yowe, Marmyon 
<P I,94> 
and me, as for +te matter betwene Fowler and Heynes, whiche
Heynes hath be with me and is bounde in an Obligacion of ij. c.
li. to abide +te rewle of alle +te matter betwene Fowler and hym
of yow, Ric. Quatermaynez, William Marmyon and me. And Fowler to
appoynte suche season as ye and other may atende; and +te souner
+te lever to Haynes. I have wryten to Fowler in semblable wyse
in this matter: whether my lettre be come to hym or no, I wete
ner. I pray you to put hym in knowlache, and to understonde of
hym whether my wrytyng be come to hym or no, and to move hym by
your wysdom after my lordes wryting, as ye understonde hym. And
so I pray yow to sende me worde in wrytyng, for I have sent
diverse tymes to Fowler place, and he hath at alle tymes be owte
&c. My goode brother remembre of +te woman ye wote of &c. And
God preserve yow. Wreten +te xxj day of Octobre.
   Your trewe brother Humfrey Forster.
   To my ryght worshipful Brother Thomas Stonore +tis be
delivered.

<Q STO 1468 T2STONOR>
<A THOMAS STONOR2>
<G M>
<P I,97>
[} [\91. THOMAS STONOR TO JANE STONOR\] }] 
[\8 October, 1468\] 
   Myne oone good Jane, as hertely as I can I recumaunde me to
yow. Like yow to wyt that my ffadyr is gone to God also: and the
there was a sone wytyng: and my modyr on Saterday by the morne,
and my ffadyr on Munday by [{d{]ayrove. And I pray yow that
William is chyld may cum with hym, and a amblyng hors for me in
hand led. I saw [\?\] yow a letter as this that was wrytyn
yestyrday. And let them cum with William that I wroote ffor, and
they shull have her clothe of blak to make hem gounys with. And
where William hathe wrytyn a letter unto me for his parsonage,
whan he comyth let hym tell me tale of trouthe and hit shall be
remedyyd, with mercy of God. And myne owne Jane, I thanke God
myne adversari of Devenshere hathe had no wurshyp: ffor ther
aperyd xliij gentlymen as this day, and he is shamyd and nonsuyd
in the cort to his great shame. And Lemman, charge Wykys to gete
as myche money as eney be had: ffor I shull spende myche money.
And goode swete Lemman, be ye myry and of goode comfort for to
cumfort me when I cum. I can not cum to youe as sone as I wuld:
ffor I most set sum direccion in Horton or I goo. Let William
cum in all hast. And the blessyd Trinite kepe yow. I-wrytyn at
Lundon the Saterday afore seynt Edward is day.
   By your ovne Stonor.
   To my Cosyn Jane Stonor, in hast.

<Q STO 1469 T2STONOR>
<A THOMAS STONOR2>
<G M>
<P I,102>
[} [\97. THOMAS STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(1468 or 1469)\]
   Willm. Stonore, I sende yow Goddes blessyng and myne. And I
wulle that ye bespeke for a gentylman of my lord Archebyhsshopis
of York a doseyn Brode arovys of Kyng, ffletcher: let them be
wele fedyrd 
<P I,103> 
with Styffew and short fedyr, and let the shaftys be no bygger
than Edmond sletyth; let hem be longer. And let not hit be wete
tymbyr in hond. I must have these redy in hast, and that hit be
not ffaylyd as my trust is in yow. I can no more, but the
blessyd trynite kepe yow. I-wrytyn at London the ffryday aftyr
seint Petyr is day. 
   By your ffadyr Stonor. 
   To Willm. Stonor. 

<Q STO 1469? TMULL>
<A THOMAS MULL>
<G M>
<P I,104>
[} [\100. THOMAS MULL TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(1469)\] 
<P I,105> 
   Right worshipfull Master and Brother, I recommaund me unto
you: prayng you to conceyve that or Robert Barre come I had
borowed iij. li. to content and paye Rayne of Devonshir for your
offis upon the (\diem clausit extremum\) after the dethe of my
good Mastres and Moder and your, whos sowle God assoyle, which I
have payd hym. And syr, I conceyve by Robert ye wold I shold
make up the offis accordyng to suche instruccion as ye sent by
hym to my cosyn Willyam in a bille, which I dar not take uppon
me, for I conceyve it not a right: wherefor I pray you to come
your self and to bryng with you the cope of all thos dedes: or
ell, and ye be not disposid to come here this terme, send us a
pleyn cope of al your dedes made seth the dethe of your ffader
with a more playne instruccion, and ye shall have my service:
and I woll call to me sum good master or felowe: and I will geve
him for his labor, and spede your mater as well as we can. And
as for the mater of my lord of Caunterbury, thowgh ye come not
this terme, I truste to God to kepe me from al hurtes in that
behalf. And syr, as for this mone whiche ye have sente me,
before God I have leyd oute for you therof, which I borowed,
iij. li.: and so with me abydeth therof no more but xl. s.: and
I shold have resceyvid of you at this tyme x. li. and v. nobles,
which I must paye and dispose or Wennesday nexte cummyng, or
ellys I must be untrewe to God and to them that be dede, and
fals of my promys, which God defend me fro. Wherfor I praye and
beseche you, as my servis may and shalbe redy to you at al
tymes, that I may have my mone her uppon Tewesday nexte commyng:
and I shal be redy to your plesyr with Goddes grace, which
preserve you and yours.
   T. M=ll= [\Mull\] .
   To my master Stonor.

<Q STO 1470? JSTONOR>
<A JANE STONOR>
<G F>
<P I,109>
[} [\106. JANE STONOR TO (THOMAS) STONOR\] }] 
[\(c. 1470)\] 
<P I,110>
   Syr, I recommande me unto yow as lowly as I cane: pleseyt yow
to wyte I have ressevyde a byle frome yow wherby I undyrstonde
My lorde Morlay dissyrres to sugiorne with yow: what answere
+tat ye have +gevyn hym I cannot undyrstond be your bylle: I
soposse your mynid was apon sum odyr materys when +tat ye
wrotyt, bot and ye have not granttyde, I beseke yow to aschusyt
and to contend your litylle abyddynge at home, and allso +te
joberde of yowr chelder and of all your howys at your hasty
goyng in to Devenscheyr: for and your abyddyng at home be no
nodyrwyse +tan yt ys, +tat wolle be [{non{]e profete unto yow
and hertes ese unto me: raythere breke up housallde +tan take
sugiornantes, for servantes be not so delygent as +tei were
wonto bee. Now farewelle, goode syr, and Gode +geve yow goode
nyghte and brynge yow welle home and in schorte tyme. Wrytyn at
Stonor apon Sante Symon and Judes daye at eve.
   Be your awne Jayn Stonor.
   [\IN DORSO\] Ples yt yow to be remembyrde apon genciayn,
ruberbe, bays, cappys, pouttys, cheverellaseys, a nounce of
flayt selke, lasses, tryacyl.
   To my brodyr Stonor in hast, at +te Swerde in Fletestrete.

<Q STO 1470? TMULL>
<A THOMAS MULL>
<G M>
<P I,114>
[} [\111. THOMAS MULL TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(1470?)\] 
   Right worshipfull Master and Brother, I recommaund me unto
you: and wher it lykid you to send me iij li. by Robert Barre,
sendyng me by your letter word that yt was for no duete of my
ffader, yf it lyke you to call to remembraunce, ther was by you
due for my ffader ys dette, whos sowle God assoyle, at
Alhalowyntyde x. li., of which I have resceyvid by the handes of
Robert Barre, before thes iij li., vij li., and so nowe the full
x. li. is content: and when ye wer in Kente and in my pore hows
ye payed me x. li. for my wyfes duete, and ther lefte v nobles
behynd &c of her duete unpayed. Also, and ye be not ther with
displesid, when ye bought in London the goblettes and flat pees
coverid, with spones &c, that sume drewe to viiij li. x. s,
wherof at Cristmes ye sente me by my Cosen Willyam x marcs, and
so ther restyth behynd unpayed therof v nobbles iij (^s.^) iiij
(^d^) . And as for the summez in your letter, parte of the
smethes sume, a xxxiij (^s.^) , I understand well: for xij
moneth passid I had a bill therof of Balam after the 
<P I,115>
moneth mynde of my ffader Drayton. As for the sum of the
carpenter for the lok, I remembre well what sum of mone was by
my mene assigned therto &c. I shall comyn with you, when I may
mete nexte with you, which with Goddis [\grace\] shall not be
long &c. And I trust to God that ye woll conceyve your self,
that as for the carpenteris wages ther may by no reson be no
mone due to hym therof, but yf it so wer that the mone to hym
assigned wer not payed, for he had it in grete for that his
labour, and a warrant made to Harre Dogett to pay yt. I wot well
it woll come to your remembraunce &c. Notwithstandyng I ame as
much behold to you for the iij li. nowe to me sente, as though
ye had lente it or geve it me. For sumwhat I had endangerid me
for the sowles past to God more than I had mone to. And as for
shepe I bought of you at the xij month mynd vj shepe at the pris
of xxij. d. a pes, which is in dute therfor to you xj. s. &c.
Syr, I am yours as ferre as my pore power may strech: and as for
your mater of inquisicion, I trust to God it be to your plesyr
and profyte, but your Councell in no wyse wold not agre to have
the said way found, after they conceyvid that it was over your
ground for other mennes ease: for though of old ther wer a toll
payable to you ther for, and long seth it was payed, yet and it
wer found your Maner were charged for ever ther with: and as for
your toll, never the nerrer for the fyndyng: and the right of
your toll never the ferther fro you, though it be not founde &c.
I sende by the berer herof the dede of lees to my Moder, and the
cope of all your dedes, and the cope of the Inquisicion. And
Jhesu preserve you to your plesyr.
   Your Thomas Mull.
   To my maister and Brother Stonor. 

<Q STO 1470 EDWARD4>
<A PRIVY SEAL>
<G N>
<P I,115>
[} [\112. LETTERS OF PRIVY SEAL TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\3 April, 1470\] 
   By the King. 
   Edw. 
   Trusty and welebeloved We grete you wele; Letting you wit
+tat our Traitours and Rebelles +te Duc of Clarence and Therl of
Warrewik, 
<P I,116> 
which daily labour +te weyes moyens at +teir power of our final
destruccion, and +te subversion of this owre Realme and +te
comon wele of +te same, been fledde westwardes: Whome we wol
folowe and pursue with our Ooste with al diligence possible, and
let and represse +teir fals and traiteroux purpose and entent
with Goddes grace. Wherfore we wol and straitely charge you +tat
immediatly after +te sight of +ties owre lettres ye arredie you,
with such a fellasship on horssebak in defensible arraye as ye
goodly can make, to come unto us wheresoever ye shal undrestande
+tat we +ten shalbee, to aide and assiste us to thentent
aforesaid, without failling as ye love and tendre the wele of us
and of owre said Realme, and uppon the feith and liegeaunce that
ye owe unto us. Yoven undre owre Signet at owre Citie of
Coventre, +te iij=de= day of Aprill.
   To our trusty and welebeloved Thomas Stoner of Stoner.

<Q STO 1471? WADEHILL>
<A WADEHILL>
<G M>
<P I,116>
[} [\113. WADEHILL TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\17 January (1471?)\] 
   Worshipfull and my right good maister, I recommende me to
youre good maistership: and like you wete +tat my lord, and my
lady his Moder also, have commaunded me to wryte unto you +tat
+tey bothe hertily desire and prey you, yef ye may in eny wyse
or your goyng to London, ye wole take +te laboure as to come
hider to speke 
<P I,117> 
with my seid lord and lady for diverse grete matters and causes
+tat +tey wolde speke unto you of. And yef ye may not come
hider, +tan +tat ye wole find +te meane to my lord Chaunceler as
to excuse my lord of his comyng not to London at +tis time, like
as my seid lord was wreten unto by a pryve seall whiche was
delivered to him on Munday last passed at vj of +te clokke
withynne night at Ewelme, which as your maystership knoweth well
was right shorte warnyng, remembring +tat +te more parte of my
lordes servauntes were sente into Suffolk to +te houshold +tere
ayens Crystemasse, and +te remenaunt of his servauntes, +tat
were here awayting, your maystership knoweth well been forthe
with my lady, my lordes wyf, into Suffolk to bringe her +tider:
ffor God knoweth she thought full longe from +te yonge lorde and
yonge ladies here childerne, +tat been +tere. And so my lord
might not come at London himself at +tis time to his worship,
and his servauntes from him: ffor I dare sey he hath here at
+tis day awayting uppon his lordship not a dosen persones.
Nethelese with Goddes grace my seid lord purposeth and woll be
and attend at +te Parlement as o+ter lordes shall, ffor by +tat
time his seid servauntes +tat be nowe absent woll be with my
seid lord ayen here. Wreten in haste +tis Thursday xvij day of
Januare.
   Youre servaunt Wadehill.
   To my right worshipfull master, Thomas Stonor.

<Q STO 1471 HFORSTER>
<A HUMPHREY FORSTER>
<G M>
<P I,118>
[} [\115. HUMPHREY FORSTER TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 5 April, 1471)\] 
   My goode kynde brother I recommaunde me to yowe in my most
feythefull wyse: and lyketh yow to wete +tat it pleased you to
speke unto me for my ladies ferme of +te ho., +tat Grey myght
have it stille, yef he cowde entrete Fryghthe, +tat I have made
the graunt unto &c. My good brother, it is so +tat +te seid
Fryghthe hath be with me this same Friday and enformed me howe
+tat my nevewes Willm. Stonor and Emond came unto hym to his
plowe and wold have entretid hym to have departe his graunte.
And he seid he wold not. And +ten my nevewe seid he shuld
departe from it maugre his hede, and had unto +te pore man
manasyng wordes, as he seythe. So +tat +te pore man stode in
grete fere. And my nevewe made hym ayenste his wille to take
viij. s. My goode brother, this dealyng and demeanyng is not to
my pore honestie; for, as I understond, Grey hath seid he wolle
have it maugre my hede, which shall not be by my wille. My goode
brother, in your wysdome reformeth this matter, trustyng to you
+tat Grey shalle not be supported to my rebuke &c. My goode
brother, this same nyght passed Syr Willm. Norys laye at
Walyngford to London ward to +te Kyng; and Dalamar and Pury
ladde hym, and he shall have his grace. My goode brother, I
sende yowe +te viij. s., +tat my Nevewe made the pore man 
<P I,119> 
take for fere. I prey you latt +te pore man no more be so
entretid. Jhesu preserve you and alle yours. 
   Your trew brother Humfrey fforster. 
   To my goode kynde brother Thomas Stonore. 

<Q STO 1471? WSTONOR>
<A WILLIAM STONOR>
<G M> 
<P I,121>
[} [\118. WILLIAM STONOR TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\24 Oct. (? 1471)\] 
   My ryght reverent and wurshypfull fadyr, I recomaund me unto
yowur good fadyrhod, mekely besechyng of yowur dayly blessyng:
plesyth yowur good fadyrhod to wytt that Barentyne complaynyd to
my lord, and he hathe made many ontru surmysse, the wyche I
kannot yt undyrstond them, but to morow I must be with my lord
by vij a kloke at my answere: and Barentyne desyryd a wryte of
ryat a pon te statud ayen yowur ffadyrhod, and ayen me and the
pryst: and my lord will do noyn delyver ayen yow, but only
ayenste the pryst, the wyche wrytt ys owte all redy: where for I
beseche yowur fadyrhode that the pryst may abbesente hym that he
be not a-tachytt, and that sum odyr pryst may sey servys for a
sesun. I am myche bounde to Molynerse, Nedam, Malyverer and many
odyr jentelmen and be the tyme my lord hathe herde me I trust to
good he wylle be my good lorde, ho have yow, my good modyr, and
alle yowrs yn hys one fyfull kepeyng, Amen. I-writtyn yn Flete
strete the xxiiij day of Octobur.
   By yowur chyld Willm. Stonore.
   To my ryght reverent and worshypful ffadyr, my fadyr Stonere,
yn hast. 

<Q STO 1472 TMULL>
<A THOMAS MULL>
<G M>
<P I,123> 
[} [\121. THOMAS MULL TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(May, 1472)\] 
   Right worshipfull Brother, I recommaund me unto you: lykith
you to wete that my Cosen Willyam hath ben with a full goodly
Gentilwoman, and comynde with her after love's lore: and for
certein I knowe 
<P I,124> 
that ych of them ys verely well content of other. Shee was late
wyf unto the son of my lorde Montjoy: and for the certente what
my cosen shall have with her, yf God provide for them that they
shall go throwe in mariage, suer yt is that of her ffader's
enheritaunce she hath in possession C. marks of lande, and after
the deth of her ffader shee shall have over that the half of al
the residue of al the lande of her ffader, and of my lorde
Mountjoyes lande shee hath iiij=xx= marcs of annuite fe by dede
endentid, for wher the lande was in value C. marcs shee hath
layn it ayen to my seid lord for yelding her yerly iiij=xx=
marcs. Thes certentees I have by my bedfelow Thomas Powtrell,
which ys of councell with my seid lorde, and was of councell at
the mariage makyng, when my seid mastres was maried to the son
of my seid lord; and as I understond by my seid bedfelowe the
hole value of syr Thomas Ichyngham is londe, as it was at the
tyme of the seid mariage makyng shewyd in writyng, was betwen
CCC. and CCCC. marcs, not fully CCCC. and better then CCC., but
how much it ys oute of the remembraunce of my seid bedefelowe.
And for certeine shee is well named, and of worshipfull
disposicion. I have ben with my Cosen Willyam there, and seyn my
seid Mastres, and comynde with her. And I fele by them both that
and ye woll, with mercy of our lorde the mater shall take gode
ende. I know verely my Cosen woll in no wise in this cas doo but
as your good ffaderhode woll he doo. Wherfor in the name of God
beth in this cas and in al other good ffader to my Cosen in
councelyng, helping, and preferring after your hertes plesyr:
for and I sholde mary I wolde he sholde chese for me. I wot well
ye woll lyke my Mastres right well when ye se her, and better
when ye comyn with her. Nowe ys al in you; in which and in al
other God be your guyde. Syr, as for the manor of Clyf, I have
comynd with Webley, +tat is of my lorde Cobham is councell: I
hope the mater shall take goode ende by trete, of which I shall
have worde +tis halidayes. Notwithstanding +ter is an attourne
recordid for syr John Fog and his felowes, in hap that we
accorde not. Jhesu preserve you and my gode Suster to your
hertes plesyr. Sir, as it is seid, ther is of late fallyn to my
Mastres ffader, syr Thomas Ychingham, CCC. marcs more after the
deth of my lady Kyriell.
   T. Mull.
   To my right worshipfull Brother, Thomas Stonor. 

<Q STO 1472? WSTONOR>
<A WILLIAM STONOR>
<G M>
<P I,125> 
[} [\122. WILLIAM STONOR TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 14 May, 1472)\] 
   My ryght reverent and wurshypfull good fadyr, I recomaund me
unto youre good fadyrhod, mekely besechyng yow of yowre dayly
blessyng, and my good modyr also: lykith yowre good fadyrhod to
wytt that I truste weryly to alle myty Jhesu and to youre good
fadyrhod that I shalle spede well of my mater, for I have
comfortabul demenure of my mastresse, but as to the wery
purpose, but yt I hope well: my good fadyr, Barrey shalle tel
yow of the demenure, and what they be that laburyn to the
jentylwoman. I beseche yow, fadyr, that Barrey may be with me
here alle thys halydayys, for the jentyllwoman wyll not departe
tyll the weke after Wytsuntyd, and ere that I trust to alle myty
Jhesu to know more to my hertes ese than I do now, hom I beseche
to preserve youre good fadyrhod and my good modyr, and have yow
yn hys mersyfull kepyng, Amen. I-wrytyn I-Lundun, the Thursday
next afore Whytsunday.
   By yowre chyld Wyllm. Stonore.
   [\ADDRESS UNDECIPHERABLE.\] 

<Q STO 1472? TMULL>
<A THOMAS MULL>
<G M>
<P I,125>
[} [\123. THOMAS MULL TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }]
[\(1472)\]
   Cosen, I recommaunde me to you. And wher as I fele by your
letter and wrytyng that my Mastres hath not that good wyll of
you as sume tyme ye ought her, Syr, ye may owe her right good
will, how be
<P I,126>
yt that it be not in so herty wyse as ye dyde before. But and I
understode +tat she had seyd to you +tes wordes: "Syr, I wold
not have you, but yt so bee +tat I may have C. li. or CC. marcs
with you in joyntur": Syr, then it had ben a mater by which ye
myght conceyve +tat shee +ten had loved your londe better +ten
your self. But I understond that ther wer no such wordes, but I
conceyve the wordes wer +tees: "Syr, I may have CCC. marcs in
joyntur, and I to take +te lesse when I may have +te more, my
ffrendes wold +tenke me not wyse &c.: and howe be yt, your
ffader wol not geve me, yet lette hym do well to you." In which
wordes I understond noon utter nay. But and ye in your mynde
conceyve +tat shee hath yoven you an utter nay, then shall ye by
myn assent never speke more of the mater, but lette yt goo: but
yf it be so +tat ye your self brake the mater for +tat shee
seid, "I may have CCC. marcs in joyntur," +ten shee hath geven
no cause in her parte of an utter breche: for it ys not oon to
sey, I may have wi+t a man CC. marcs, and +tes wordes, I woll
not have you but it so be I may have CC. marcs in joyntur wi+t
you. But for al thys resonyng I wold knowe +tis of you: and the
case wer so +tat shee wolde ben agreable to have you with xl.
li. or iiij=xx= marcs joyntur, wolde your herte +ten love as ye
have doon before +tys seson? +tis question wolde I knowe of you,
for and I knowe your disposicion in this behalf, I trowe to God
al +tis love and mater of love wolde be revyvyd ayen in short
seson: ffor and it so be +tat ye brake +tis mater for a lytyl
hastynes of your self, +ten wolde I not we left so: but and shee
wer +te cause of brech, +ten woll I not stere ne avise you after
+tis ne+ter to write nor sende to her. But oon thyng I dar safly
sey in my conceyte, that shee on her parte sithe your departier
hath ben vexed and trowbelyd with +te +trowes of love more
fervently in her mynde +ten ye have ben syth vexid wi+t her
seyinges. And +tis my cause so to sey and deme, I know oonys for
certeyn shee loved you as a parfyte lover, and +tat right late
never better +ten +te last seson +tat shee was in London. Trewe
it ys love oones parfytide, +tough +ter hap sum daungerus speche
or countenaunce, yet ys not +te hole ffyr of love quenchyd, but
when +tat +te person, +tat was moste daungerus in speche or
countenaunce, by her self allow: wher as shee may revolve at her
lyberte wi+toute controllyng every +tyng +tat longeth to loves
daunce, +tough +te fflame of the ffyre of love may not breke
oute so +tat it may be seyn, yet the hete of love in yt self is
never +te les, but rather hootter in yt self. Wherfor I sey +tis
for certayne, I dare depose for her +tat the sharpe and unwar
chaunges from thought to +tought, and ofte remembrance of the
trowbely wawes of love have so possid her to and fro in 
<P I,127>
her owne mynde, +tat shee desyreth as sore after relief, as fer
as shee may for shame, as +te man in the water desyreth to be
releved frome drownyng in +te perill of +te see: but daunger and
shame woll not suffir her to speke yt with oute it be so +tat
+ter be sume newe mocyon made to her &c.: the menes wherof I
have compassid in my mynde, which by +te mercy of Gode I woll
attempte yf it so be ye kan be plesid +tat way, and +tat in
shorte tyme. Syr, if I may, I woll be with you on Saturday or
Sonday &c. I wot well ye remembre what your ffader by his last
letter assure+te you in joyntur: and syr, +tat ys feyr: and as
for o+ter thynges touchyng your self, I shall enfourme you at
our next metynge to your hertes plesyr, with the mercy of Jhesu,
which preserve you. 
   Thomas Mull.
   To William Stonor of Horton in Kent, be this letter delivered
in haste. 

<Q STO 1472? TMULL>
<A THOMAS MULL>
<G M> 
<P I,127>
[} [\124.THOMAS MULL TO THOMAS STONOR\] }]
[\(1472)\]
   Right worshipfull Brother, I recomaund me to you. And in as
muche as that my Cosen Willyam cumeth home to you hymself,
therfore I wrytt not to you of the demyng &c., ne of the
communicacion betwen my seid Cosen and my Mastres Blounte: but
this direccion have I taken in the mater, I have thorowly
comyned with the preste +tat I spoke to you of, and tolde hym my
conceyte howe he shal be demened in brekynge with my seid
Mastres: and that he shall not breke to much at oones to her,
but ever when he spekyth in the mater to her and fele here, and
certenly to marke her wordes unto the tyme that he be verily
assured in hymself, as nygh as he kan, of her disposicion. And 
over +tat I have appoynted with hym that withyn iiij dayes after
+tat he is come to my seide mastres I shal send hym a letter
directe to her fro me 
<P I,128>
and in my name: and he hath promysid me that every letter +tat I
sende here shal be brekyn or he departe from her. And the man
+tat shal ber the letter shal be namede, Cosen, to +te said
prest, so +tat he shal abide +ter in the howse. And, if it so be
+te preste fele her veryly applyable, +te messenger shall
[{speke{] with her hymself. John Foorde shal do the message, and
abide ther ij or iij dayes. Furste I was disposid to have sente
to +te [{Norce{] to have felte my seid Mastres: but me thought
after, +tat it had not bene beste, for paraventur the Norce
wolde feer to breke fer wi+te her, and also shee myght not
contynue and abide uppon the communicacion. This preste may
alwey have liberte and lesyr to speke with her. And I have lefte
with him a remembrance in writyng how I wol he shal do, wherein
I am verily assured he wol do his parte &c. Syr, as for my Cosen
Willyam, for God is sake callyth hym forth with you when he is
at home with you, and let him walke with you, and gevyth wordes
of good comforte, and beth good ffader unto hym, as I certenly
knowe ye be, and so letyth hym veryly understond and know. For,
Syr, he is disposid to be a musyr and a studyer, which
remembreth and breketh that as much as ye may. And Syr, but if
+tis mater sum dele come of her own hert, she shal not otherwyse
be labored to for certen. Also, yf it can be, the preste
promysith me that she shall sende me worde in writyng of her
dysposicion, if her disposicion be to us warde: which letter I
shall sende you and my seid Cosyn. And veryly, if she be
appliable, it is to be remembred her of her joyntur of the lorde
Montjoy, and also of her own ffader, for he taketh the profite
of a grete parte: and also in what case lorde Montjoy is land
standeth it is good to be remembred to her. And I beseche Jhesu
spede and directe this mater to his plesyr, and to preserve you
and yours &c.
   Thomas Mull.
   To my Right worshipfull Brother, Thomas Stonor.

<Q STO 1473? KARUNDELL>
<A KATHERINE ARUNDELL> 
<G F>
<P I,128>
[} [\125. DAME KATHERINE ARUNDELL TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\7 Jan (? 1473)\] 
<P I,129>
   Ryght trusty Cosyn, I comaunde me to you: and where as hit
was agreed by you and my councell at your beyng at Dorchester
byfore Crystmasse that Richard Tomyowe, consyderyng the gode
service that he hath don for my husbonde and me in dayes passed
and the charges that he must do for me here after, shulde be
made sure of landes and tenementez to the yerely value of xx=ti=
marke. And he ys agreed to take too lytill Manours in Corunwall,
one called Wynnyanton and the other called Kenell, of the value
by the yere of xij. li.: of the whiche I pray you, Cosyn, to
speke to my cosyn Syr Richard Harecourte and Edward Grymston
that betweene you to sealle hym a dede that William Menwynnek
other Richard Reynolds shall brynge you of the said Maners terme
of his lyve: for he woll not procede no furder in my maters in
to the tyme he be made sure of the same, whiche were to me a
grete hurt, as ye understonde. And that this be done as my
speciall trust is in you: and our lorde have you in his blessed
kepyng. Wrytten at Excestre the xxvij=th= day off Janyver.
   By your Cosyn Dame Kateryne Arundell.
   To my ryght worshipfull Cosyn, Thomas Stoner, Esquyer. 

<Q STO 1473? TMATHEW>
<A THOMAS MATHEW>
<G M>
<P I,130>
[} [\126. THOMAS MATHEW TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1473)\] 
   My Ryght worschepful Mayster, y recomande me onto you:
desyryng to here of youre prosperyte and gode hele, the whech y
pray almy+gty God longe to contynue you theryn. Furthermore
youre water of Erme ys y-stoppyd at Flutedamerel by the offycers
there that ther may no ffyssch com up: wherfore the gentelmen
that holdyth the water may not paye ther rente, and as thay
havyth y-warnyd Water Frende. Wherapon y went to Willyam Fowel,
as +ge commandyt me, to wete what aunswer he had of Johne
Gybbes: and he sayde, yff +ge cowde schew youre tytel gode of
olde tyme, as +ge sayde to hym that +ge hadde, yf he my+gt have
understondyng therof by you or by youre councell that hyt my+gt
be schewyd to Syr Phylyp Courtenay and to Orchard, that he wolde
doo hys goode wyll theryn to fulfylle youre intent. Also y was
wyth Mayster Courtenay, and tolde hym of the sam mater: and he
sayde, that my lady wolde that ye scholde have youre ry+gt, yf
+ge cowde schew that hyt were youre tytel of olde tyme. Also y
mevyd John Huchyn for the ward of N . . . yayn: and he aunsweryd
me, yf +ge my+gt reken eny part of the londe, he wolde entrete
youre Maysterschep therfor. And y spake to Willyam Fowel of the
sam mater: and he sayde, yf the londys were y-ffeffyd to that
yntente to dissayve you, that hyt was collucyon and +ge my+gt
reken by the lawe. Also the parson of Bykebure hath y-chargyd
hys tenents that they schol no+gt pay no ale wytys to me: and
Johne Yeme toke a dystresse, whane he was Baylee, and put hyt yn
warde, and the parson delyveryd the dystresse ayen, by what
delyvere y can no+gt understaunde: wherfor y pray you that +ge
wol sende worde to youre councel how hyt schalbe demenyd. And as
for the comyssyon, the commyssyoners havyth y-made a rule to
sytte in every hundryd, and y tryst yn God by the rule of youre
councel +ge schalbe savyd harmeles, y
<P I,131> 
tryst yn God. Also John Ry+gt promysyd me that he wolde bere
thys letter: y pray you that +ge sende wrytyng by hym after
youre intent how al materys schalbe doo by youre avyce. No more,
but the holy Trynyte have you yn hys blessyd kepyng.
   T. Mathu.
   Thys letter be delyveryd unto Mayster Thomas Stonore in hast.

<Q STO 1473 WSTONOR>
<A WILLIAM STONOR>
<G M>
<P I,131> 
[} [\127. WILLIAM STONOR TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 20 April, 1473)\] 
   My ryght reverent and wurshypfull fadyr, I recomaund me unto
your good fadyrhod in the most umbylle wyse that I kan or may,
mekely besechyng your good fadyrhod of your dayly blessyng:
lykyth your good fadyrhod to wytt that I have spokyn with master
Selenger for your dute of your water sondage and sute of the
Flete Damerell, and I am answeryd that I shuld be at Holbyntun
at the corte, the wyche shalle be at holy rode tyde nexte
comyng, and there to show evydens and recorde by mouth how hyt
hath byn usyd yn tymys past: and as after Selenger seyyng in to
my ladys counsell and hys that my lady wold not nother he but
that your tytyll shuld be knowyn and no maner of fraude by them
leyd to abatryt, and yff yt were tryyd with your fadyrhod so to
be recorded and you to yn-joyye: and I found Gybbys welle
disposyd to your fadyrhod, but Orcherd and Columb made many
resuns ayen the water and eke ayen the sondage, the wold ye
shuld have a wey to your grounde, but they wold ye shuld nat cum
and send that wey. And yt lyke your fadyrhod I spoke to master
Selenger acordyng to your comaundment for my brother Tomas
mater, and enfourmyd hym hov they had 
<P I,132> 
resseyvyd the rent, and hov your fadyrhod had don acordyng to
hys desyre, and they entend nat: and he hath wrytyn unto the
party to delyver the mon[{ey{] ayen: the wyche letter I send
unto your fadyrhod that ytt myte be delyveryd unto the seyde
party. Master Selenger desyryth your fadyrhod to forbere your
sute ayen them thys terme, and that the trety go forth yff yt
may be, or ellys your fadyrhod to take your a-wantage the nexte
terme: but he ys dysplesyd sore with them for the reseyvyng of
the money, and seyth they shall pay yt ayen. Also fadyr, master
Selenger hath comaundyd alle my ladys counsell that non of my
ladyse tenantes shuld fysche yn your water, and that the
tenantes be so warnyd. Fadyr, and yt lyke yov, Umfrey Salman ys
ded, and he hath a may chyd of x yere old to hys eyyr, the wyche
ys ward unto your fadyrhod, and I trust to sesen yt unto the
behofe of your fadyrhod, thov I tary a day or to the lengger.
And also, fadyr, Frynd kannat yt delyver me, but he seyth unto
me that your fadyrhod shalle be plesyd, and that I shalle have
alle maner of dutys with me, both the old and eke the nev: corte
day shalle be at Ermyngtun on a Sunday on senyte, and I caste me
to departe on the morrov after, with the grace of Jhesu: for
erst I kannat be delyveryd the lond of the ward wych dravyth to
rent by yere xx marke: and I porpose fadyr to cum hom ward by
Henbery, and so forth, as I dyd the laste tyme. No more to your
good fadyrhod at thys tyme: but I mekely beseche your good
fadyrhod that thys my bylle may recomaund me unto my good modyr
yn my most umbyl vyse, mekely besechyng my good modyr of hir
dayly blessyng &c., mekely besechyng your fadyrhod in lyke vyse,
and I mekely besechyng alle myty Jhesu to preserve your good
fadyrhod and your [{wyf, my{] modyrs good modyrhod, amen.
I-wrytyn in Exeter the Thursday next afore seynt Jorgeys day. My
lady Arundell prayyth your fadyrhod to be good cosyn unto her yn
suche maters as her servant shall move your fadyrhod of.
   By your chyld Wylliam Stonor.
   To my ryght reverent and worshypfull fadyr, my fadyr Stonor. 

<Q STO 1473? WSTONOR>
<A WILLIAM STONOR>
<G M>
<P I,133>
[} [\128. WILLIAM STONOR TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1473)\] 
   My ryght reverent and wurschypfull fadyr, I recomaund me unto
your good fadyrhod yn the most umbyll wyse that I kan or may,
mekely besechyng your fadyrhod of your dayly blessyng: lykyth
your fadyrhod to wyt that my modyr ys in good hele, and alle my
brethern and susters, blessyd be alle myty Jhesu: and I beseche
your good fadyrhod not to be dysplesyd with me for Feyrmers
mater, for I never medyld odyrs wise but told Sawnder, that that
dede that he shewyd me shulde be to the womans tytyl after my
conseytt: and by my trowth, fadyr, that that ys feld was don ere
I knowyt: but fadyr, there is nothyng caryd, nether shalle nat
be with the grace of alle myty Jhesu, hom I mekely beseche to
preserve your good fadyrhod, Amen. I-wrytyn
   By your chyld Wyllm. Stonor.
   Also, fadyr, my Suster Cotymore ys delyveryd of a feyre sun,
and both don welle, blessyd be Jhesu.
   To my ryght reverent and wurschipful fadyr, my fadyr Stonore.

<Q STO 1474 WSTONOR>
<A WILLIAM STONOR>
<G M> 
<P I,140> 
[} [\136. WILLIAM STONOR TO THOMAS STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 6 February, 1474)\] 
   My ryght reverent and wurshypfull fadyr, I recomaund me unto
your good fadyrhod in the most umbull vyse that I kan or may,
mekely besechyng your fadyrhod of your dayly blessyng: lykyth
your fadyrhod to wyt that my modyr ys in good hele, blessyede be
alle myty Jhesu, my brethern and my susters and my nevue
Cottysmore. I beseche your good fadyrhod that yt wylle plese yov
to speke with the Abbot of Dorchester that I may have suche fe
as Marmyun had with hym with every thyng acordyng as he had: for
I trust thorov your good fadyrhod that I may have hyt. And I
beseche your fadyrhod to wryte for me to the pryor of Wychyswyde
for such fe as he had there: and I trust 
<P I,141> 
thorov your fadyrhode to spede with hym: for I have sente unto
hym, and he hath answeryd that he wyll do to the pleasyre of
your fadyrhod what he kan do: for he seyth he knovyth your
fadyrhod, but he knovyth not me. And I mekely beseche your
fadyrhod to wryte to the pryor of Byssam: and I trust to spede
ther in lyke wyse thorov the helpe of your gode fadyrhod with
the grace of Jhesu, hom I mekely beseche to spede yov yn alle
your maters, and to preserve your fadyrhod yn alle maner of
weyys, Amen. I-wrytyn +tat Stonore the Sunday nexte after
Kandelmas day.
   By your chyld Wyllm. Stonor.
   To my Ryght reverent and wurshipfull fadyr, my fadyr Stonor. 

<Q STO 1474? WELMES>
<A WALTER ELMES>
<G M>
<P I,148> 
[} [\141. W(ALTER) ELMES TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1474)\] 
   Jhesus Christoforus.
   My rygth wurshupfull Cosyn, I recommaund me unto yow with all
my herte: plesyth hit yow to undyrstond that I have spokyn with
my cosyn Cottismore, and aftyre the effect that ye and I
comynyd, that is to sey that ye and he to stond and abyde the
direction of eny ij wurshupfull in your contre: to the wych he
is agreable, so ye name soch as ye afore named, that is to sey
Master Fowlere, M. Katermayns, M. Rede, and if hit plese yow to
name M. Harcort: I suppose he wull be with yow at Pyrton. And
the mene seson that no rent be levyd till such direction be had
by such as ye afore rehersyd me of: which shall cawse grete
amyte and the sonner the better: I suppose yf hit wulle be at
the month mynd, at wych seson I suppose some of the afore
rehersyd will be ther: and I suppose ye shall fynd hym a good
and kynd brothyr. No mor to yow at this tyme, but Almyghty God
preserve you fro all adversyte.
   W. Elmes.
   To my ry+gth wurshipful Cosyn, Wyllyam Stonor. 

<Q STO 1474 T3STONOR>
<A THOMAS STONOR3>
<G M>
<P I,148> 
[} [\142. THOMAS STONOR TO HIS BROTHER, WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(1474)\] 
<P I,149> 
   Broder Stonar, after all dewe forme of recomendacion hadde,
plesse hyt yow to hunderstonde +tat I never longed so sore to
speke with you as I do now, marvellyng grettly +tat ye be longe
hense, remembryng how grettely in consette ye stonde in London
with a gentylwoman, and the grette labore +tat hys made for here
agynes you: and grettely hyt hys nossed and hasse bene tolde me
with many persons +tat but ye be ware she shall be take from
you. I here muche and sey no thyng: befor the laste tyme +tat ye
where abowte suche a mater my speche and presens with you hurte
you, and awelde you not: wherfore orlt ye to me a sewrte. I
wolle in thys mater honsware no man, and yette I am grettely
question with for you of divers persons thynkyng +tat I shulde
ken muche of your delyng: for I wolde not for my horsse and
harnes and all my oder goode +tat in thys mater ye toke a
rebuke: wherefore remembre you shortely for the pass[{ion{] of
Gode, for syth I cam to London xx men haffe questioned with me
in thys mater, iffe ye shall be at your comyng, wheche I beseche
Jhesu be not longe, who have you ever in kepyng.
   Your fethefull broder Th. S.
   Thys letter be delyvered to my broder Willm. Stonar in hast. 

<Q STO 1475? ADELAPOLE>
<A ALICE DE LA POLE>
<G F>
<P I,154> 
[} [\148. ALICE, DUCHESS OF SUFFOLK TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\5 March, (? 1475)\] 
   Right trusty and entierly beloved ffrende we grete you well,
desiryng and praying yow, all excuses layde apart, that
incontinent this lettur seyne ye come to us to Ewelme for
certayne grete causes concernyng our wele and pleasir, whiche at
your comyng ye shall undrestond more pleynely: and theruppon ye
to departe ayen at your pleasir, so that ye fayle not here ynne
at this tyme as our parfait trust ys in you: and as in gretter
case we woll be gladde to do for you, that knoweth our lorde,
who have you ever yn gouvernaunce. Wreten at Ewelme the v day of
Marche. +g .
   Alyce Suffolk.
   To our Right trusty and entierly beloved ffrende Wyllyam
Stoner. 

<Q STO 1475? EDSTONOR>
<A EDMUND STONOR>
<G M>
<P I,157> 
[} [\152. EDMUND STONOR TO HIS MOTHER AND BROTHER\] }] 
[\18 July, (1475)\] 
   Ryght reverent and wurschypfull modyr, y recommaund me unto
yow: desyryng to [{here{] of yowre welfare, the whyche almy+gty
Gode contynu long to hys plesyr and yowr hertes desyre. Yef hyt
plese yow to wytt at the makyng off thys letter I was in god
hell, and all my men. No mor to yow at this tyme, but the
trinyte have yow in hys kepynge. And I pray yow let me be
recomaundyd to my [{sister{] yowr wyff. Wryttyn at Cales the
xviij day of July, the day of the departyng of the Kyng and the
duk of Burgayn, my lord and all the oste in to Frauncewarde.
   Yowr brothyr Edmund Stonor. 

<Q STO 1475 EDSTONOR>
<A EDMUND STONOR>
<G M>
<P I,160> 
[} [\155. EDMUND STONOR TO (WILLIAM STONOR)\] }] 
[\28 October, (c. 1475)\] 
   Right reverent and wurshypfull Brothyr, I recomawnd me unto
yowe, good Brothyrhod, desyryng to here of yowre wellfare, the
whych Almyg+gty God contynue long to hys plesyr and yowre hertys
desyr: doyng yow to wyt y have spokyn with +te parson of
Penyngton of the matyr +tat I have spokyn to yow off, and the
parson hath told me that hyt was Perkyns dowtter: and Perkyns
seythe +tat he cowd aweyll me in my lond x. mark a yer. But I
undyrstond nat +tat he wull depart fro hony lond with here, but
with mony, and what +tat ys the parson of Penyngton can not
tell. But, syr, yff hyt wold plesse yow to speke with Perkyns
and awys whethyr he, wull geve hys dowttyr hys part of Snowys
well at Borowyscot to her and to her eyrys, I wold with the
glader wyll dele with hym: and in that that he seyth +tat he
cowd aveyll me in my lond so grett money by yer, I shall beseche
yow to speke to hym in what maner of weys: and y beseche yow to
be my good Brothyr in any weys, as I have fownd yow herafore
tymes. No more to your good Brothyrhod at thys tyme but the
Trinite have yow in hys kepyng. Wrettyn at Stonor on seynt Symon
hys day and Jud. And I undyrstond Perkyns ys at London.
   By your brothyr, Edmund Stonor.
   To my ryght worschypfull Brothyr Stonor be thys delyveryd. 

<Q STO 1475? EDSTONOR>
<A EDMUND STONOR>
<G M>
<P I,161>
[} [\156. EDMUND STONOR TO (WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1475)\] 
   My rygth wurschypfull Brothyr, I recommaund me unto yow,
desyryng to her off your wellfare, the qwyhych almyghty
[{Jhesu{] contynw: doyng yow to wytt that John Blakall browtt to
Stonor a dyker for to make yowr dykes in . . . feld betwen the
hy way and the ew tre: and John Mathew and I wolde a mad a
bargeyn with hym but we [{cowd{] nott styll there on, nedyr we
wyst nott how ye wold have hytt, whedyr ye wold have hytt
sengyll dydge or [{dobyll{] dydge, and therffor we mad no
bargeyn with hym: but I askyd hym how he wold do a perdge of
sempyll dydge, and for . . d. he wold a don hytt a dobyll, sett
hym with whit thorn, and a mad the dydge a yerd deppe: and yff
hytt wold plesse yow to [{send{] word to John or to me whedyr ye
wold have hytt dobyll dydge or senkyll, and what ye wull geve
for a perdge we [{wull{] send for hym, and yff we can acord off
the prys he schall still awayt and begyne. And also brothyr,
wher ye speke to B . . es carpenter so to make yowr myll hows,
he sayeth he can nott mak hytt but he mak hytt new: but Wyllyam
Ale . . wyk [{sayeth{] that [{he{] with thyn lytyll space wyll
mak ye +tat hows to stand ther xx yere, and okapy but lytyll new
tymbyre: and we thy[{nk{] hyt wer +te lestt schardge to yow so,
thane to mak a new hows. But I beseche yow brothyr latt not yowr
carpenter know +tat I send yow thys now. No more to yow brothyr
at thys tyme, but the trinyte have yow in hys kepynge. And ye
schuld have a Monday next comyng a xl plowys in Pyssyll felde.
   Your brothyr Edmund Stonor.
[\NO ENDORSEMENT.\]

<Q STO 1475? JSTONOR>
<A JANE STONOR>
<G F>
<P I,165> 
[} [\158. JANE STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1475)\] 
   Sone, I send you Goddys blessyng and myne. I understonde by
my tenantys and yourys that Maystyr Lewes John desyryth for to
have a letter fro you for to undyrstonde your maystyrschype and
youre favor towarde your seyde tenants and myne. Wherefore I
pray you to do aftyr hys desyre yn supportyng your ryght, and I
woll do to the power that God hath sende un to me my parte wyth
the grace of God, whome I beseche to be youre gyde, and that
thys sympyll byll may recommaunde me un to my worshupfull and
goode dowchtyr your wyfe.
   By your pore Moder Jane Stoner.
[\NO ENDORSEMENT.\] 

<Q STO 1476 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M>
<P II,2>
[} [\161. THOMAS BETSON TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\12 April, 1476\] 
Jhesu An=o= xvj=o=. 
   Right worshipfful Syr I recom[{aund{] me unto your good
maystershipe, and to my right worshypffulle maystresse your
wiffe, and, yf it plese your maystershipe, to my maystresse
Kateryn. And syr, +tankyd be the good lord, I understond ffor
certeyn +tat oure wolle shipped be comen in [{. . .{] beste to
Cales. I wold have kept the tydynges till I had comen my self,
because it is good: but I durst not be so bold, ffor your
maystershipe now ayenst this good tyme may be glade and joyffull
off this tydynges; ffor in trouth I am glad and hartely +tannke
God off it. And syr, whene I come I shall tell your maystershipe
many +tinges moo by +te mercy off our Lord, who preserve your
maystershipe ever. At London (\le xij jour de Apprill\) . Your
servaunt to my power
   Thomas Betson.
   To my right worshipffull and synguler good mayster Willm~.
Stoner, Esquyer, (\soyt d.d.\) 

<Q STO 1476 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M>
<P II,2> 
[} [\162. THOMAS BETSON TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\22 April, 1476\] 
   Jhesu M'iiij=c=' lxxvj.
   Right worshipffull and my right Synguler good mayster I
recommaund me to unto youre good maystershipe. And syr, ples it
you to wete, this same day I depart to Cales wardes throw the
myght off oure 
<P II,3> 
Lord, Jhesu be my good spede. And syr with all my hart I +tannke
your maystershipe ever off your gentyll chere and ffei+gthffull
loffe, the whych allway ye bere and owe unto me, and off my
behalff no+tinge deservid: how be it God knowing my good hart
and will, and my prayer shall ever be redy for your maystershipe
and all your howsold. And syr, ffor a remembraunce I send yow be
+te brynger heroff ffor deynte ij powdyrd lampres, to ete hem
whan it ples yow, I wold +tei wer better. Also syr, ye shall
R[{esseyve{] , by the grace off God in John Somers barge now
comynge to Henley a pype rede wyne ffrom my broder: I trust it
shall ples your maystershipe well, ffor so my broder tellith me.
And Syr, as touchynge the ffelles of Robert Turbotes of
Lamberton, it makez no matter as yit thowe no man see hem till I
send you o+ter word ffrom Cales: ffor I shall send you more
clerer writinge ffrom Cales by the mercy off Jhesu, whom I
besech ever to preserve your maystershipe in helth and vertu. At
London the xxij day off Apprill. Be your
   Servaunt T. Betson.
   Syr, I besech your maystershipe +tat this powre writynge may
have me lowly recomended to my right worshipffull maystresse
your wyffe, and in lyke wyse to my gentyll Cossen and kynde
maystresse Kateryn Rich, to whom I besech your maystershipe ever
to be ffavourable and loffynge. Syr, I send you a scantlyn off
your wyne herin closed.
   To my right worshipffull and Synguler good mayster Willm.
Stonor Esquyer (\Soyt d.d.\) 

<Q STO 1476 THENHAM>
<A THOMAS HENHAM>
<G M>
<P II,3> 
[} [\163. THOMAS HENHAM TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\1 May, 1476\] 
   Jhesu . M . iiij=c= lxxvj. 
   Ryght worchipffull my Ryght Syngguler good mayster, I
recommaund me unto your good maysterschipe ever more dessyring
to here 
<P II,4> 
of your wellffare, the wyche I beseche Jhesu mayntene and
contenew to his plesur &c. Letyng your maysterschipe to wyt that
I departyd ffrome Sandewych the xj day off Aprell, and so cam
unto Calys apone sher thursday laste was with the wolle schipys;
and so, blesside be Jhesu, I have resayvid your wollys in
ssafte. Fordermore, Syr, yeff yt plesse your maystershipe for to
understonde +tis, I have ressayvid your wollys as ffayer and as
hole as any mannys in the fflete. More hover, Syr, yeff yt
plesse your maysterschipe ffor to understonde howne your wolle
was howsid ever dele by Ester even. Fordermore, Syr, yeff yt
plesse your maysterschipe ffor to understonde that the schepmen
be content and payde off thayer ffraythe. Fordermore, Syr, yeff
hyt plesse your maysterschipe ffor to understonde off your
wollys howne maney I have resayvid: Summa xxx sarplers ffyne
Cottes wolle, and of M. Cottes x sarplers and off ffyne yonge
Cottes wolle vij sarplers and of M. yonge Cottes iij sarplers
and a sarpler of Refuse, Summa lj sarplers. All so, Syr, yeff yt
plese your maysterschipe ffor to understonde that I have
ressayvid a barell with harnes of peny, the wyche your
maysterschipe sapke [\spake\] unto me of at my departyng frome
yow, and a nother barell with harnes of bylys, the wych I have
schipped hem unto London in one of the wole schipys, the wyche
ij barelys schulde be kep unto the tyme that I com unto London
my selffe. Fordermore, syr, yeff yt plese your maysterschipe
ffor to understonde that Thomas Betson cam unto Calys the laste
day of Aprill: and so he departyd in good helthe unto Brugys
mart the fyrst day of May. No more unto your maister at thys
tyme: but allmythi Jhesu have you in hys kepyng. Wretyn at Calys
the first day of May.
   By your prentes Thomas Henham.
   Unto my worschipffull and myne synguler master Willm. Stonor,
Squyer, of Oxford schyre, thys letter be delyvered in haste. dd.

<Q STO 1476 GOXBRYGE>
<A GODDARD OXBRYGE>
<G M>
<P II,4> 
[} [\164. GODDARD OXBRYGE TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\9 May, 1476\] 
<P II,5> 
   Jhesus. M. iiij C . lxxvj. 
   Right worshipfull and Reverent Sir, plesith hit you to
understonde +tat as these daye I have Res[{seyved{] fro Thomas
Betson and fro Thomas Henham iij letterys, that is to saye ij to
you and j to Thomas Howlake. And Sir, Thomas did write to me
that I shuld shippe +te sarpler, the pooke, and the ij pokets
woll, beyng at the Wollkey, now at this shippynge: And whan I
have weyyde heme to reconne with +te custumerys clarkys and pay
+tem for you and for heme ij. s. iiij. d., and to the weyor ffor
every sake j. d., and to +te chalker j. d., and to +te porors
viij. d.: thys is Thomas Betson is wrytyng to me. And Sir, I
have delivered to William Somer, bargemane, to care to Henly:
ffirst vj burdenys of rusys: Item xij saltffish, of +te whiche
saltffish iiij be lengys: and a fardell aynte [\?\] in canvase,
in +te wheche fardell is a bage with spysys, and ij brassys, a
payer of pauenys for my maistres, a gowne of annyse de Padawis,
and a mustard querne: and as these day at none +te barge
departyd fro London; and he saythe he will be at Henli a
Mondaye, or a Tuysdaye at +te fardyst, with the grase of God, wo
have you in hese kepynge. At London, the ix daye of Maye,
   By your prentyse Goddard Oxbryge.
   [{To my{] good maister, Willm. Stonor, esquier, at Stonor. 

<Q STO 1476 GOXBRYGE>
<A GODDARD OXBRYGE>
<G M>
<P II,5> 
[} [\165. GODDARD OXBRYGE TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\12 May, 1476\] 
   Jhesu. A=o=. M. iiij=c= lxxvj. 
   Right worschipffull Syr, please it you to wete that I send
you wrytinge bi Howlake +tat Edmond Jod your tenante will
departe owte of your howse I cannat tell wo sone, but I had no
aunswer fro you agene for kowenat what comnante is betwyne you
and heme, and therfor I beseche your maisterchip to let me have
kowelige what comnante ys betwne you and heme, for I can
nothenge say to heme till I have an aunswer fro you or fro my
mastres. And sir, I have
<P II,6> 
R[{eceived{] fro Calise ij letters to you, and I wulld a sent
theme to you before thise time, but I cowd no none body to
convey theme savyng I had delyverde theme to a woman of Henly,
and assone as sche was on horsebake in the strete sche wase
arestid, and that is +te cause that you had theme nat before
these tyme. And sir, I ame callyd apon for +te [\"for +t"
REPEATED IN MS.\] monys, the wheche Davyd owyt, and in spesyall
of the good man of +te marmayd, and of the polt'. And sir, I
have inqueryd of maister Wrohntn is comemyng to London, and as
yet he is nat come, but as sone as heys come you schalle have
understondyng with +te grase of God, who have your Right
worschipffull and Reverent maister in his blessyd kepyng ever.
At London the xij daye of Maye.
   By your prentyse Goddard Oxbryge.
   To my Right worshipffull and Reverent maister Willm. Stonore,
squyer, be delivered. 

<Q STO 1476 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M> 
<P II,6> 
[} [\166.THOMAS BETSON TO KATHERINE RYCHE\] }]
[\1 June, 1476\]
   Jhesus. An=o=. xvj=o=.
   My nowne hartely belovid Cossen Kateryn, I recomande me unto
yow withe all the inwardnesse of myn hart. And now lately ye
shall understond +tat I resseyvid a token ffrom you, the which
was and is to me right hartely welcom, and with glad will I
resseyvid it; and over that I had a letter ffrom Holake, youre
gentyll Sqwyer, by the which I understond right well +tat ye be
in good helth off body, and mery at
<P II,7>
hart. And I pray God hartely to his plesour to contenew the
same: ffor it is to me veray grete comfforth +tat ye so be, so
helpe me Jhesu. And yff ye wold be a good etter off your mete
allwaye, that ye myght waxe and grow ffast to be a woman, ye
shuld make me the gladdest man off the world, be my trouth: ffor
whanne I remembre your ffavour and your sadde loffynge delynge
to me wardes, ffor south ye make me evene veray glade and joyus
in my hart: and on the to+tersyde agayn whanne I remembre your
yonge youthe. And seeth well that ye be none eteter off youre
mete, the which shuld helpe you greately in waxynge; ffor south
+tan ye make me veray hevy agayn. And therffore I praye you, myn
nown swete Cossen, evene as you loffe me to be mery and to eate
your mete lyke a woman. And yff ye so will do ffor my loveff,
looke what ye will desyre off me, whatsomever it be, and be my
trouth I promesse you by the helpe of our Lord to perfforme it
to my power. I can [{no{] more say now, but at my comyng home I
will tell you mych more betwene you and me and God beffore. And
where as ye, ffull womanly and lyke a loffer, remembre me with
manyffolde recomendacion in dyversse maners, remyttynge the same
to my discresscion to depart them +ter as I loveff best, ffor
south, myn nown swete Cossen, ye shall understond +tat with good
hart and good will I resseyve and take to my self the one halff
off them, and them will I kepe by me; and the to+ter halff with
hartely loveff and ffavour I send hem to you, myn nown swete
Cossen, agayn, ffor to kepe by you: and over that I send you the
blissynge +tat our Lady gaveffe hir dere sonne, and ever well to
ffare. I pray you grete well my horsse, and praye hym to gyffe
yow iiij off his yeres to helpe you with all: and I will at my
comynge home gyff hym iiij off my yeres and iiij horsse lofes
till amendes. Tell hym +tat I prayed hym so. And Cossen Kateryn
I +tannke you ffor hym, and my wiff shall +tanke you ffor hym
hereafter; ffor ye do grete cost apon hym as it is told me. Myn
nown swete Cossen, it was told me but late +tat ye were at Cales
to seeke me, but ye cowde not se me nor ffynde me: ffor south ye
myght have comen to my counter, and +ter ye shuld bothe ffynde
me and see me, and not have ffawtid off me: but ye sought me in
a wronge Cales, and +tat ye shuld well know yff ye were here and
saw this Cales, as wold God ye were and som off them with you
+tat were with you at your gentill Cales. I praye you, gentill
Cossen, comaunde me to the Cloke, and pray hym to amend his
unthryffte maners: ffor he strykes ever in undew tyme, and he
will be 
<P II,8>
ever affore, and that is a shrewde condiscion. Tell hym with
owte he amend his condiscion that he will cause strangers to
advoide and come no more there. I trust to you that he shall
amend agaynest myn commynge, the which shalbe shortely with all
hanndes and all ffeete with Godes grace. My veray ffei+gtheffull
Cossen, I trust to you +tat thowe all I have not remembred my
right worshipfull maystres your modyr affore in this letter +tat
ye will off your gentilnesse recomaunde me to her maystresshipe
as many tymes as it shall ples you: and ye may say, yff it plese
you, that in Wytson Weke next I intend to +t=e= marte ward. And
I trust you will praye ffor me: ffor I shall praye ffor you,
and, so it may be, none so well. And Almyghty Jhesu make you a
good woman, and send you many good yeres and longe to lyveffe in
helth and vertu to his plesour. At greate Cales on this syde on
the see, the ffyrst day off June, whanne every man was gone to
his Dener, and the Cloke smote noynne, and all oure howsold
cryed after me and badde me come down; come down to dener at
ones! and what answer I gaveffe hem ye know it off old. 
   Be your ffei+gtheffull Cossen and loffer Thomas Betson.
   I sent you this rynge ffor a token.
   To my ffei+gtheffull and hartely belovid Cossen Kateryn 
Ryche at Stonor this letter be delyvered in hast. 

<Q STO 1476 GOXBRYGE>
<A GODDARD OXBRYGE>
<G M>
<P II,8> 
[} [\167. GODDARD OXBRYGGE TO MISTRESS STONOR\] }] 
[\12 July, 1476\] 
   Jhesu. A=o=. +tI. iiij=c= lxxvj 
   Ryght worshipfull and Reverent Maistes, I recomend me unto
you in the moste lowlyest wyse that I best can or maye: and,
Maistes, pleasthe you to undirstond that I have R[{eceived{] a
letter ffrome you by Davy Wrixham, the whech letter I undirstod
wele, and schoche matter ase you he wreten to me ffor I wille
aply hete as ney as I [{may{] . And,
<P II,9> 
Maistes, ther as you wrote to ffor your fesche I have aplyd hete
as ny as kowd, but as I cane I will send it to you as sone as I
maye, and thate shalbe a Tuysdaye or a Weddensdaye at the
ffardest. And as for odir matterys that you wrote to me ffor, I
have nat yete inqueryd off theme, ffor the tyme was sso shorte I
cowd nat: the tyme wase sso shorte, sso I R[{eceived{] your
letter a Tuysdaye betwyxte vj and vij a the kloke. And as ffor
that yo wrote to me of Davy I wyll do acordyng to your wyll: and
as ffor hyse gownys he had convyed theme, before you rod owte of
London, into Whytebredys howse, and he had j off theme beffore
he spake with me: and as for the remnante he shall nate have
some wrytyng ffro you. And as ffor all oddir matterys I wyll
ssend you word as ssone as I maye with the gras off owre lord,
whoo have you, Right Worshipfull Maistres, I his blessyd
kepynge, Amen. Be your prentyse
   Goddard Oxbrygge,
   the xij day of Jull.
   To my Right worshipfull Maistres Stonor, at sstonor. be thyse
delywer. in hast. 

<Q STO 1476 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,9> 
[} [\168. ELIZABETH STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\18 August, 1476\] 
   Jhesu. Ano. xvj 
   Right well belovid Cossen, I recomaund me unto you with all
myn hart and I +tannke you hartely, gentill Cossen, off youre
expediscion 
<P II,10> 
that ye have made in plesynge off my brodyr Stocker off his
bucke: he is beholdyn unto you: at your comynge to London he
will thannke you I dowt not as reason is; and I, as ffor my
parte, +tannke you ffor my venyson, the which I have
R[{eceived{] by my brodyr Crooke. Also, gentill Cossen, I
undyrstond +t=t= my dou+gther Kateryn is craysed and hath a
desese on hir neke: I marvell what it shuld be: yff it wold lyke
you, I praye you hartely to suffer hir to come to London to me
to the intent she may be holpyn +teroff. I send syr William,
Annes Dibdale, and Howlake for hir, and on Twesday next I trust
to see you here at London, and whanne ye come ye shall be welcom
with more. Jesu spede you ever, amen. At London (\le xviij jour
d'aoust\) .
   Elysabeth Stonor.
   [\P.S. IN DORSO.\] Gentyll Cossen, I praye you to bryng with
you the ij baysons and hewers off silver, the silver
Candelstikes and the monstrans, and the letill silver bayson to
set it in. I wold have it here ayenst myn husbonds terement, and
it can not come better at no tyme +tanne with you now because
off strenght.
   To my most worshipffull Cossen Willm. Stonor, Esquyer, this
be delyvered. At Stonor. 

<Q STO 1476 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,10> 
[} [\169. ELIZABETH STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }]
[\12 September, 1476.\]
   Right Reverent and Worshipfull and enteirly best belovyd
Cosyn, I recommende me unto you in the most lowlyest wyse that I
best can or may. And syr, as this day by your servaunt Thomas
Mathew I receyvyd a letter from you, by the which letter I
understonde that +ge be sumwhat amended and shall every day
better and better +ten other by +te grace of God. Also, gentyll
Cosyn, I understonde that my brother and yowris is sore seke of
the poxes: wherfore I am right hevy and sory of your beyng
there, ffor the eyre of poxe is ffull contagious and namely to
them than ben nye of blode. Wherfore I wolde praye you,
<P II,11>
gentyll Cosyn, that +ge wolde come hedyr, and yif hit wolde
plese you so to doo, &c. And yif that hit lyke you not so to
doo, Gentill Cosyn, lettith me have hedyr some horsis I pray
you, and that I may come to you, ffor in good faith I can fynde
hit in my herte to put my self in jubardy there as ye be, and
shall do whilst my lyffe endureth to the plesure of God and
yours. For in good faith I thought never so longe sith I see
yow, ffor in trowth I hadde will hopid that your horsis shulde
a ben here as +tis night; and that I tho+gt verely, and so
poyntid my self for to a be with you as +te morue at night with
Godes mercy, which shulde have ben to me right a grete comfort;
ffor in good faith I have not ben mery at myn hert +tis
sevynnight day ffor dyverse maters the whiche hath ben brokyn to
me. Wherfore I wyst full hertly dyverse tymes +tat +ge hadde ben
here: ffor I wot will that ye coulde an answeryd in certayne
maters better +ten I: ffor truly I had not so besy a weke sith I
cam hedyr, exepte oone day, which sir William, and John Mathewe
both can enfourme you parte +terof. And Syr, as towchyng my
childeryn I hertly thanke you that hit lyke you so for to tend
them: but +git, Gentyll Cosyn, yif hit plese you to sende hem up
with such horsis as hit lykith you to send for me, I wolde
hertly pray you, ffor the poxe ben past out of this Countre and
Cyte as fer as I understonde, blessyd be God. Gentyll Cosyn, I
pray you hertly that I may have a redy worde from you on
Saterday at nyght at +te ferthest; for in trowth I can not be
mery unto +te tyme that I know verely how that +ge will I be
demenyd hereyn. No more to you at this tyme, but almyghty Jhesu
preserve you, and kepe you longe in good hele of body and longe
to lyve in vertu to Godes plesure, and so to your moste hertes
desire, amen. At London +te xij day of Septembr. A=o= xvj.
   And myn sonne Betson recommende hym unto you as hertely as he
can or may, and bysowght to vouchsaffe to pray for hym &c.: and
ye shall Rec. ij letters of hym by John Mathewe. And as this day
viij of the Cloke in +te morning he toke his barge. I pray God
sende hym good spede, amen.
   By your ovne Elysabeth Stonore. 
   To my Right Worshipfull Cosyn, Willm. Stonor, squiere, this
be delyvered.

<Q STO 1476 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,12> 
[} [\170. ELIZABETH STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\9 October, 1476\] 
   Jhesu M. iiij=c= lxxvj. 
   Right Interly and beste belovyde Cosyn, I recomaunde me unto
you in moste lovyng wyse. Syr, I resayvyde ffrome you a letter
by the wyche I consayvyde that ye canne not departe but it
shulde be to your gret lose. Wherffor ye do ryght welle to set
hyt in a suerte: ffore hyt thys no lytell monay that he howys
you. And Syr, as ffore my Cosyn Fowler, he whas not come as thys
nythe, but he wylle be to morow at his plase as hyt thys tollde
me. And as ffore my son Betson I have no wrytyng syn you
departe. I truste yt shall not be longe to or whe shalle have
wrytyng ffrome hym. And Syr, ther as ye wrte unto me ther as
+tat Chetys and Hoderstone shulde be leffte ther stylle, truly
so hyt thys: ffor I have put ffore no thyng save hondely for
sarten plote. fforder more, Syr, ye schall under[{stonde{] +tat
Thomas a Wode hys very sore syke at the Sworde in Flete strete.
Syr, the Kyng hys come to Westemester, and I understonde there
schalle be a gret Counsell, whereffore I wot never. My Cosyn
Hellmys recomaunde hym unto you. And Syr, I thanke you hartely
as I cane ffore your good tynchys: ffore truly thay whare very
goode and swet as I het hany many a day. Whereffore I sent my
ffader hone off them to hys soper. Whereffor he thanke you ryght
hartely. No more unto you at thys tyme, Jhesu have you in his
kepyng, Amen. At London the ix day of Octobur at ix a Cloke at
nythe.
   By your owne Elysabeth Stonor.
   Allso Syr, ye schulle understonde that Thomas Wode hys [{syke
wi{]th the pokys.
   To my Ryght Reverent and Worshipffull hosbon Wyllm. Stonor,
Sqyer, at Orton thys letter be delyverd. In hast. dd. 

<Q STO 1476? ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,13>
[} [\172. ELIZABETH STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }]
[\22, October (1476)\]
<P II,14>
   Right interly and best belovyd husbond, I recomaund me unto
you in my most herty wyse, evermore thankyng you right hertely
off all kyndeness to me schewed at all tymes, and nowe ffor your
good Venysone and Coneys, the wheche you sent me be Heri
Blakhall, the whech is gret deyntis to have here in London:
wherfor I sent the halffe hawnche to my ffadyr and a cowpyll off
coneys: and they recomaund them unto you and thanke you ryght
hertely. And sur, you schall undyrstond that I have be with my
Lady of Southfolke as on Thursday last was, and wayted uppon hyr
to my lady the Kynges Modyr and hyrse, be hyr commaundment. And
also on Satyrday last was I wayted uppon hyr thedyr ageyne, and
allso ffro thens she wayted uppon my lady hyr Modyr, and browght
hyr to Grenwyche to the Kyngis good grace and the quenyse: and
ther I sawe the metyng betwyne the Kynge and my ladye his Modyr.
And trewly me thowght it was a very good syght. And sire, I was
with my lady of Southfolke at this day hopyng that I myght have
hade hyre at sume leysyre that I myght a spokyn to hyr ffor the
money, but trwly sche was very besy to make hyre redy, ffor sche
is redyne to Cauntyrbery as this same day, and sche wyll be here
ageyne as on Satyrday next comyng, ffor so sche told me hyr
selff. Also Sire, I spake with my cosyn Fowler at my lady the
Kyngis Modyr; and I thankyde hyme as hertely as I cowde for his
gret kyndnese that he schewid to you and to me at all tymys,
prayeng hyme of his good contynuans: and he askyde me when you
wyld cum hydyr. And I tellyd hym that I supposyd that you wyld
be her as this weke. And also I spake with my cosyne Rokysse:
and he askyd me in leke wyse, and he seyth itt is not hys
ffortune to mete with you here in London: and I spake to hyme
ffor John Mathews mater, and prayed hym to be good master unto
hym: and he awnswerd me ageyne, and seyde that he had lytyll
cause, for he seyth that he have ben the most importune manne
that myght be to hymewardes. And I awnswerd and seyde to hyme,
that I coude never undyrstond hyt but that he owght hyme his
servyse to his powre. And Sire, my lady of Southfolke is
halfindell dysplesyd because that my Cystere Barantyne is no
better arayed, and leke wyse my Cyster Elysabeth. And sche seyth
with owght they be otherwyse arayed, sche seyth, sche may not
kep them: and sche seyth that my Moder and yours schuld saye
that you have I-nowe to ffynd my Cyster Elysabeth with all. Also
I undyrstond +tat Sure John Buttelyr hath spokyn to my lady to
have my Cyster Barantyne with hyme: what he menyth therin 
<P II,15>
we wot nere, with oute that he wold have the rewle of hyr
husbandys lyvelode be that meane. Wherffore my Cyster wold speke
with you ffore that mater to have your cownsell in what is best
to do. And Sire, as ffor my sone Betsonne I herde no worde
ffrome hyme sith you departyd: for ther commyth no passage this
viij dayese. And Sire, I wold pray you whenne Davy Wrixame
commyth to you owght off Cottyswold, that ye wold send hyme
hydder that he myght wryght to my sonne howe he have done in the
contre. And good Sire, I pray you that my blewe gowne of damaske
may be sent to me ageyne alhalowne day, and my cofferse and my
dowter Caterynes, that I spake to you ffore. And sire, suche
kercherse and smokkys and small japys that be in the chest that
Cateryne my womanne had role of, whech chest stondyth in my
sonne Betsonys Chaumbre. And Sire, I wold pray you that +gee
wold send this gere to me that I myght take rekenyg of hyre:
ffor she skevisith hyr and sey that suche gere as I aske her is
there. Sir, I pray you send me no more ryngis with stonys: ffore
the ryng that you sent me be Hery Blakhall, the stone is ffallyn
owght be the way and loste: wherffore I ame sory. Good sire, let
it not be long or I may se you: for truly me thynke ryght long
syth I se you. Your chylderne and myne ffare well, blessyd be
God, and they be to me a gret cowmfort in your absens. No more
to you at this tyme, but almyghti Jhesu preserve and kepe you in
long helth and vertue to hys plesure. At London the xxij day of
Octobre. 
   My owne Cosyne, I sende you a bladyr with powdyr to drynke
when +ge go to bede, ffor hit is holsome ffor you.
   Be your ovne to my powre Elysabeth Stonore.
   To my Ryght well-belovyd Cosyn Wyllm. Stonor, squyer, at
Stonore, this be delyveryd.

<Q STO 1476 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,15> 
[} [\173. ELIZABETH STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\25 October, 1476\] 
<P II, 16> 
   Jhesu M. iiij=c= lxxvj. 
   Ryght Interly and beste belovyde Cosyne I recomaunde me unto
you as hartely as I cane. ffordermore, Cosyn, plesyth hyt you to
understonde that I have resayvide a bore ffrom you: the wyche I
thanke you ryght hartely ther ffor: the wyche bore hys very
goode and well braunde. Allso Cosyn, my moder and yourys sent me
monay to by her boge, and sche sent me a gobelet to amend: the
wyche gobelet I have schuyde unto dyverys golldsmythys: and thay
say hyt cane not be amendyd, but hyt be new made: and so I pray
you to infforme my moder. And as ffor the boge my moder sent
unto me ffor, I send hyt to her by Folyhet, the brynger heroff.
And so, Syr, I pray you to infforme my moder, as hyt thys: and I
will kepe the gobelet unto the tyme that I have answere ffrome
her. Allso, Syr, I pray you to recomaunde me hartely unto here
goode moderhode. Fordermore, Cosyn, I longe sore ffore you, to
se you her in London whanne you have done your besenes: but I
understonde that you have hade gret besynys syn you departyd
ffrome me. Syr, ye schalle understond that I had no wrytyng
ffrome my son Betson: ffor as ny as I cane in-kewere, syn
Howlake departyd ther came no passag ffrom Calys. Forder, syr, I
pray you that ye wolde woche-saffe ffore to sen John Mathew unto
Hendelay, ffor to breke the ffardell and to wrythe schuche
thyngys [{as{] is in hyt and to make ij ffardellys ther off,
that hyt mythe be sent downe by the caryar off [{Hendelay{] ffor
I cane not have hyt ayenst the tyme helse: ffore I most nedes
have hyt, ffore the chylld [{eryn have{] ne chaung, ffor they go
so schamely that I have pete off them. And goode Syr, as ffor my
nawne [{gowne that I{] wrothe unto you off, I pray you that I
mythe have hyt as sone as ye may. No more unto you [{at thys
tyme{] , but Jhesu have you in hys kepyng. Wretyn at London the
xxv day off Octobur.
   By your ovne Elysabeth Stonore.
   Unto my Ryght hartely well-belovyde Cosyn Wyllm. Stonor,
Squiere, thys be delyverd, in hast. 

<Q STO 1476 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,17> 
[} [\175. ELIZABETH STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\7 November, 1476\] 
   Jhesu. M. iiij=c= lxxvj. 
   Ryht enterly and beste belovyd husbond I recomand me unto you
in my most hartyest wyse that I beste can or may, sartyfyyng you
that I have receyvyd your letter of John Stute and iij coppull
of conyes and bald reybbys with the chyk, the whyche I thanke
you for als hartyly as I can. Also I conseve by your wrytyng
that you have had very meyche a do with holdyng of cortes and
odir besynes, the [{wyche{] , as I pray God son to send you a
nend thereof, that I myght [{see you{] here. And Syr, as
tocheyng the hogeyshed of salte that you wrote [{to{] me for, 
<P II,18> 
truly Syr I wold a sente yt to you with alle my harte, but +te
bargys wer departyd before your letter cam [{unto{] me. Also,
Syr, I have reseyvyd sen you departyd ij letterys frome my [{sun
Bet{]sun as on Monday last wase, on of them deectyd to you. ...
The whyche letterys I have red and wele undirstond them [{...
I{] conseve by hese wrytyng that he ys very lothe that Elmys
woll ... departe frome heme: never the less he thynkithe that
xiij markes and a d[{i ...{] pryse for to bye lx saks: after
that pryce it wold draw myche m[{oney{] and lytell gettyng suld
be therin. And yet I truste to ... have yt, for as I undirstond
yt ys yete unsold ... that my sun Betsun sent to me by the
brynger [{herof ...{] I pray you grete wel my broder Thomas
Ston[{or from me desiring y{]ou to seye to heme that I marvyll
gretly what [{... moveth{] heme to saye schoyche langege by me
as he dothe, for as ... [{that{] I [{wold{] plok from your
lyelod alle that I can to make a grete ...: for +tat I wote
welle you can awnswere for me wele enowe. And so I ... to defend
me. No more to you at thys tyme, but I beseche all myg[{hty
Jhesu{] have you, right ynterly and best belovyd husbond, in hys
[{blyssid kepyng ever{] Amen. At London the vij day of Novembr.
   My owne good [{husb{]ond I se well ye [{re{]membre +te
puttyng at ... out of +te bed whan you and I lay last togedyr.
   By your ovne [{to my{] powre, Elysabeth Stonor.
   To my Right worshipffull husbond [{Wyllm.{] Stonor, Sqyer,
thys letter be delyverd in hast. d. d. 

<Q STO 1476 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,18> 
[} [\176. ELIZABETH STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }]
[\11 December, 1476\]
   Jhesu
   Ryght entirely and beste belovyd husbonde I recommende me
unto you in the most lovyng wyse that I best can or may.
Moreover, pleseth hit yow to understonde that I have receyvyd
your letter, a byll closid in the said letter, which I have redd
and ryght well understondyd: and as
<P II,19>
for all such stuff as the said byll specefyth of, as yet I have
not receyvyd. How be hit the barge is comyn with +te said stuff
as +tis nyght at vij of clocke: and Syr, soo hit will be the
morne or I can receyvyd hit. Fer+termore, syr, plesith hit yow
to wit that as on ffryday last past I dyende with my ffadir and
my modir. And +ter was at dyner with hym +te frendys of +ge
childe which was movid for oone of my do+gters at your last
beyng heere. And so at after dyner +tey hadde +tere comunycation
for +te said mateer, wherby I understode +ter dispocitions how
+tat +tey were disposid in the said mateer. And truly hit was
nothyng as hit was spokyn of at +te begynnyng: wherfore I
answeryd and said in +tis wyse: that +too shee were my childe,
as she is, I coulde not answere that mateer without yow nor
noght wolde doo. How be hit, I answeryd in your byhalf: that I
wyst ryght well +tat +ge wolde be ry+gt kynd and lovyng ffadir,
yif God ffortunyd that ye and they shulde dele. And Sir, there
as ye wryte that +tat +te bargemen ben loth to take and Rec. any
stuff of ours I marveyle gretely: ffor truly to my knowlege I
hadde never +ting caryed by any of them but +tat I paid them
truly +terfore. And Sir, as for +te vj cowpull of haberndens,
the which ye wryte ffore, they shall be bought and sente yow
ryght shortly. And as ffor your gownys of chamlet and dublettes
of sylke, I have bought hem: the which shall plese yow ryght
well, I trust to God, at your comyng, &c. And Sir, my sonne
Betson recommende hym unto yow, and he come home as on Monday
last past, and he hath brought with hym, blessid be God, good
tythynges, the which he and I shall enfourme yow at your comyng.
And ther as ye wryte that ye will sende me of a wylde bore and
other venson ayenst Sonday, truly I thanke yow as hertly as I
can. But truly yet I wolde pray yow that ye wolde spede yow
hedyr als sone as ye can: ffor I wolde trust to Godes mercy hit
shoulde be to your profetes and avayle in tyme comyng by the
grace of our Lord, who ever preserve and kepe yow to his plesur
and your most herts comfort. Amen. At London the xj day of
Decembre A=o= xvj. 
   And Cosen, heras ye wryte to me +tat I had no leysyr: truly I
have ben crised and besy, ellys I wyld have wryte to you or thys
tyme.
   By your ovne Elysabeth Stonore.
   To my Ryght well belovyd Cosen, Willm. Stonere, esquyer at
Stoner +tis be delyverd.

<Q STO 1477 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,22>
[} [\180. ELIZABETH STONOR TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }]
[\7 March, 1477\]
   Jhesu A=o= xvij.
   Ryght enterly and best belovyd husbond, I recomaund me unto
you as hertely as I can. Syre, I have ress[{eyved{] a letter
ffrom you, and a nothyr letter +tat my son Betson sent you and a
tokyn from you be your servant Christoffyre, whech letter I have
red and ryght well undyrstond. And as towchyng John Elmys,
truly, syre, he is a marvelus man: I conseyve be my son +tat he
wold goo from his promesse +tat he made to you and to hym of his
woll +tat hyt suchld aryse as good in pokyng thys +gere as hyt
ded +te last +gere: and +tat I consyve he cannot make good: but
never +te lesse I dout not but +tat you and my son Betson wyll
handyll +te matyrs well I-nowe: ffore blessyd be God +ge be on
+te surere syde: ffore all +te sayde woll I have ress[{eyved{]
hyte and fayer howsyd hyt: and +gyt ffore all that I wot well
+tat you and my son wylnot dele with hym othyrewyse than ryght
and consyes wyll requere, and +tat is best. Syre, I thank you
hertely +tat hyt plesyd you to wyshe me with you at redyng off
my letter: truly I wold I had a be there with you at +te same
seson with all my hert. And as towchyng my brothyre Stonore,
truly syre ther was no bodye +tat tellyd me precysly +tat hyt
was he, but I knowe well hyt was he, ffore hyt was sayde to me
+tat I kept you here among a meany of boyes with othyre langwage
more, whech was not fyttyng fore to have such langwage of any
servant that long to you ore me: fore, and he remembyre hym
selff well, he hath no cause to saye of me otherwyse than well:
fore I never sayde to dysplease hym be my wyll, but fore hys own
worshypp, and +tat knowyth God, how ever preserve you. At
London, +te vij day of Marche. Cateryn and Hue Fenne recomaund
them unto you, and they praye fore you as they can. And 
<P II,23>
Syre Wyllm. Stavelye and all your howshold ffaryth well, blessyd
be God. 
   By your owne to my pouer Elysabeth Stonore.
   My good Cosen, I am crassed in my baket: you wat what I men.
   To my ryght worschypfull Cosyn Wyllm. Stonore, squyer, at
Stonore be this delyvered.

<Q STO 1477 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M> 
<P II,27> 
[} [\185. THOMAS BETSON TO DAME ELIZABETH STONOR\] }] 
[\22 Dec. (1477)\] 
   Jhesu Ano. 
   My most synguler good lady, after all dew commendacion hadd:
please it your good ladishipe to wete that I am throw and agreyd
with Laurence Fyncham, and have sett hym such surte as with the
same he is right well pleased. Whereffore, good madame, I
beseche you to remembre myn obligacion, the which ye have off
myn, and lett it be
<P II,28> 
broken and sent me hiddyr to London by the next that comethe.
Also, madame, I have spoken with Laurence Fyncham ffor the
xviij. l~i. due by Mayster Hampton, and he tellith me pleynly
that mayster Hampton will geve no more but xiiij. l~i. ffor
them, that is after iiij. s. the unce: and yff ye will nat so,
ye shall have your baysens agayn. And +terffore looke how you
+tinke best and +terafter send me word, and I shall doo +terin
as I wold doo ffor my selff. I spake unto my lady your modyr on
seynt Thomas daye, and she wold scarsely oppyn hir mouthe unto
me: she is displesid and I know nat whereffore with owte hir old
sekenes be fallen on hir agayn: God send hir ones a mery
contenaunce, and a ffrendely tonnge, or elles shortly to +te
mynnorres, wheroff she waxhith wery now, as it was told me but
late. I am wrothe with Kateryne, by cause she sendith me no
writtynge: I have to hir diverse tymes, and ffor lacke off
answere I wax wery: she myght gett a secretary, yff she wold,
and yff she will nat it shall putt me to lesse labour to answere
hir lettres agayn. Madame, I beseche the blissid trenyte to send
you a Mery Cristymas to your hartes ease and ever to preserve
and kepe you in longe helth and vertu. At London the xxij day
Discembre.
   By your owne sone and servaunt, Thomas Betson.
   To my right synguler good lady, Dame Elyzabeth Stonor, (\soyt
dd.\)

<Q STO 1477 MHAMPDEN>
<A MARGERY HAMPDEN> 
<G F>
<P II,28> 
[} [\186. MARGERY HAMPDEN TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(c. 1477)\] 
   Worchypfull Cossyne, I recomaund me unto yow, and I pray yow
hartely, cossyne, to come heder thys nyte or to-morow by
tymesse, both for +te mater off my nefew, and also for +te mater
that I desyred yow, asse my truste yn yow, or asse I may do
thynge to yowr plesur, +te weche to do I wold be glad, God
knowthe, ho have yow yn ys kepinge.
   Yowres M. Hampden.
   To my worchippfull Cossyn, W. Stonor, in haste. 

<Q STO 1477 THAMPDEN>
<A THOMAS HAMPDEN>
<G M> 
<P II,29> 
[} [\187. THOMAS HAMPDEN TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(c. 1477)\] 
   Ry+gthe worchypeffull cossyn, y recomaund me unto you: prayng
yow that hyt lyke yow to come to London and speke wyth me and
wyth my syster: and that hyt lyke yow to hye yow yn all godely
hast, asse my truste ys yn yow, ffor y wolde be ago and +ge werr
y-come, for we may nat go yn-tyll +ge come. No more unto yow,
the holy Trenite have yow yn ys blessyd kepyng. Y-wryten yn hast
at London.
   By T. Hampden of Hampden.
   To my Ry+gthe Worschepeffull Cossyn, Wyllyham Stonorr. 

<Q STO 1470S HMAKNEY>
<A HENRY MAKNEY>
<G M>
<P II,30> 
[} [\190. HENRY MAKNEY TO WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(before 1478)\] 
<P II,31> 
   Myne especialle gode Mastire, y recomand me to youe &c. Syr,
y have seyne a grete oxe for youe, yf ye be note purveyde: +te
pris is grete, hit is of xxx. (^s.^) , but ye shalle have x.
(^s.^) for +te talow and hide, and he wulle serve youe wele for
a C. messe: ye moste sende a servante of yours to mete with me
at Wallyngeford on Moneday by vij at +te clokke at Buttons. Y
wull showe hyme +te oxe, and if ye +tynke +te pris to grete, y
wulle go with hyme to Abyngdon markete, and ye shalle have iiij
or v dosyne pygeons, ij or iij lamys of xij. (^d.^) a pece,
chekyns and capons moste be hadde at Oxford on Satusday.
Colyngerygge and y be at opyne warre: y purpose to entre in +te
Manere of Makney with Godes grace on Moneday or Wennysday; and
yf y have nede y pray youe sende me a gode lade or ij that y be
note bete owte ayene. If +ter be any odire servise, +tat y may
do abote your busines, sende me word and y shalbe redy &c.
   Your owne.
   H. Makney.
   To my specialle gode Mastire W. Stonor.

<Q STO 1478? HMAKNEY>
<A HENRY MAKNEY>
<G M> 
<P II,32> 
[} [\192. H. MAKNEY TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1478)\] 
   My specialle gode Maister, y recomand me to youe &c. Sire, my
modire hathe [{been{] with me on Friday laste, and hathe
receyvde of me xl. s. for +te terme of oure ladys day, and nowe
y ame here gode sone and alle welle while hit wull endure. She
movide me for here suertes 
<P II,33> 
of here paymentes, which [{y{] promiside here before youe: +ten
I praede here name +te persons whiche [{she would{] have bownde:
+te she namyde Kydwelly or Harry Dogette, Thomas Latten, Roberte
Felde, and Thomas Gossefforde: wheron y have grauntide here to
yeve here a answere within iij wekes after Ester. Morovire, y
told here +tat y wulde departe fro +te place or sete a tenante
+terin: +ten she questionyde me who shulde be my tenante: y sede
+tat ye were adviside to be tenante, with +tat ye my+gte entrete
here for here parlour and +te Chapell: and y suppose +tat she
wulbe easely entretide, if ye sende be tymes while +te gode
wylle lastithe. Wherfore on Tusday nexte comyng shalbe +te
honowre day at Wallyngefforde: and yf ye wulde sende to Herry
Dogette +tat he wulbe +ter and make here halfe a promise +tat he
wulde be a suerte for here paymente, +te he my+gte entrete here
for +te parlour; and Chapell. Also y pray youe remembre +tat +te
Stuard and John Mathewe my+gte be with me on Moneday nexte: ande
as for yowr stuffe at Hurley may be broughte to Makney with my
cartis, whiche shall carye my litill stuffe, and save youe money
and me bothe &c.
   Your servaunt H. Makney.
   To my speciall gode Maistire Sire William Stonor. 

<Q STO 1470S WSTONOR>
<A WILLIAM STONOR>
<G M> 
<P II,33> 
[} [\193. SIR WILLIAM STONOR TO JOHN BOUNDY\] }] 
[\(after 1477)\] 
   Boundy I grete yov wele. I pray yov delyver my servant,
brynger of thys bylle to yov, v. li. or x. marke, yf yt may be,
for I must nedes pay yt in that Cuntrey: hyt shalle be alouyd
yov of the vode. Remembre me, as [{I{] may doo for yov: and thys
bylle wryt with my hond shalle be your dyscharge of the sum
reseyuyd.
   Wyllm. Stonore, K.
   To Boundy ... be this deliverd. 

<Q STO 1470S HFORSTER>
<A HUMPHREY FORSTER>
<G M>
<P II,36> 
[} [\197. HUMPHREY FORSTER TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(after 1477)\] 
   Ryght worshipfull and entierly wel-beloved Nevew, in my most
feythefull wyse I recommaunde me to yowe. And pleaseth yowe to
wete +tat I entended verreyli to have be with yowe this
afternone for suche persones as will be with yowe to be suretees
for Joy: but it is so +te wether is suche +tat I dare not ryde:
wherfor I beseche you to have consideracion to alle the
premysses and +tat ye lyke to take surete for +te pore man +tat
he may goo at large. And also +tat ye lyke to wryte a letter to
Herry Doget to deliver hym. And Jesu preserve you. In hast this
same Saterday.
   Your owne H. F.
   To my worshipfull Nevew Syr William Stonor, in hast. 

<Q STO 1470S ANORTON>
<A JOHN, ABBOT OF NORTON>
<G M>
<P II,37> 
[} [\199. JOHN, ABBOT OF NORTON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(after 1477)\] 
   Ryght wurschypfull and my fulgud Mayster after all due
recommendacion to yowe hade: prayng yowe to send me now in my
grete necessite by the berer heroff, my servant, your ferme ffor
the parsonage of Pyrton, the whyche was due to have ben payd the
viij day after the nativitie of Saynt John Baptist: wher I had
grett mervayll when my brothyr Schanon no mone had so long
taryyng in London over your promyse, me to grette coste and hym
to grett labur: the sayd ferme due xxiij. li. vj. s. viij. d.,
never afore this tyme sendyng twyes for hyt. Besykyng yowe now
to send hit me by my sayd servant withowte any delay: for truly
I had never gretter mestur then I nowe have, as my sayd servant
schall infowrme yowr maysterschyppe; to the whyche I beseke yow
gyfe credens, ffor at mydsomer I purpos to fette myself the
ferme of +t=e= sayt terme, and bryng yowr grewnd and tresyr my
hake, with the grace of Good, who have yowe in hys blessyd
kepyng to his pleassur and yowre hertes desyre. At Norton the
third day of Februar.
   Your bedman John, abbot of Norton.
   To my wurschypfull and my fulgud mayster, Sir Willm. Stonor
of Stonor in the cownte of Oxon, and of the parech of Pirton, be
this delyveryt. 

<Q STO 1478 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M> 
<P II,42> 
[} [\205. THOMAS BETSON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\25 March, 1478\] 
   A=no= xviij=o=. 
   Right honorable Syr, and my right Synguler good mayster, I
recommaunde me unto your good maystershipe. And Syr, yff it lyke
you, accordynge to myn promesse unto your maystershipe I mette
with my Lady your wyffe at Windsouer, and ffrom thens to London
to my symple 
<P II,43> 
power I helppid to conveye hir. And Syr, by the waye we were
ryht mery, thankyd be God, and so with his mercy we mene here to
be mery ffor the season that my lady is here: and whanne your
maystershype is redy to come hidder wardes we here shall so
welcome you that the season of your abydynge shall nat be
noysom, with Godes grace. Also syr, Robert Warner of Watlyngton
is departid and gone home: truly he is an untrew man of his
promesse: it is well done ye call sharply uppon hym, or elles it
wilbe longe or ye have your money off him. Your maystershipe
knoweth best what ye have to doo. Syr, thannkyd be God, my lady
is ryght mery and in hele off body, our Lord preserve her, and
all we your servauntes resonable mery, as the world reqwyereth
here, and I know well many off us wysche ffast to Stonor agayn
by cause off a substaunce, and I ffor my season the which is
ryht longe, as me semes, God Almyghty knowithe all: I say no
more, but our blyssed Lord spede you att Wyndsouer in your
matters and elles where. At London on our Lady day in the nyght,
when I deme ye were in your bede, ffor my nyne smerttyd, so God
help me,
   By your servaunt T. Betson.
   To my ryht synguler good mayster Syr Willm. Stonor, knyght. 

<Q STO 1478 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M> 
<P II,44> 
[} [\207. THOMAS BETSON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\16 April 1478\] 
   Jhesus. A=no= xviij=o= 
   Right honorable Syr and my right synguler good mayster, I
recommend me unto your good maystershipe. And, syr, this same
nyght I ress[{ayved{] a bill from your maystershipe, by the
which I undyrstond +tat you have sent me ij capons: and syr, +te
same ij capons I have ress[{ayved{] by the caryer Gardener, and
they be right good: truly ffor the which I thanke your
maystershipe hertely for your kyndely remembraunce, ffor with
your maystershipe I am nat forgettyn I ffynd, and so all way,
and I praye God reward you. Syr, I toke ij capons, but +tei wer
nat the best, as ye counseled me by your letter to take, and in
deed to saye the trouthe I cowd nat be sufferyd. My lady your
wiffe is resonably stronge waxhid, the good lord be thankyd: and
she tooke hir will in that matter lyke as she doyth in all
o+ter. I dare nat wryte you the trouth till you come home, the
which we deme shalbe on Setterday next with Godes grace, who
ever preserve your right worshipful person in longe helth and
vertu to his plesour. At London, the xvj day of Apprell
   Your servant T. Betson.
   Syr, I wold have written you som tidynges but I know none as
yit +tat be trew, save we intend here, with Godes grace, to
begynne shippynge apon Monday next. Syr, John Saye is deed, our
lord have mercy apon his soull.
   To my righte worshipful mayster, Syr Willm. Stonor, knyght,
(\soyt dd.\) 

<Q STO 1478 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M>
<P II,46>
[} [\211. THOMAS BETSON TO DAME ELIZABETH STONOR\] }]
[\17 May 1478\]
   Jhesus An=o= xviij=o=.
   Right honorable and my Synguler good lady, with due reverens
as is accordynge I recommaund me unto your good ladyshipe. And
<P II,47>
ffer+termore lyketh it yowre good ladyshipe to know that on
trenyte evyne last passed I come unto Cales: and I thannke +te
good lord hartely I had a fful fare passege, and the bettyr I
know well it was throw your good prayers, off the which, iff y
durst be so bold, I wille beseche your ladyshipe off
countenewance, and I to my power shall remembre your good
ladyshipe with all your loffers dayly amonges my poure prayers,
off the whiche, yff they be good and acceptable unto God, my
mayster your husband, your good ladyshipe, with all your
children I beseche him hartely ye may have parte: and I beseche
almyghty Jhesu to send your good ladyshipe as comffortable
helthe and welffare at Stonor or elles where as ever ye had in
eny place to Godes plesour. And good madame, I beseche your good
ladyshipe to remembre my Cossen Katteryn of all such matters as
I spake unto your ladyshipe off at many dyverse tymes, as ye
know: I remembre hir ffull off, God know it: I dremyd ones she
was xxx wynter off age; and whanne I woyke I wyschyd she had
bene but xx: and so by lykelyod I am soner lyke to have my
wysche +tan my dreme, the whych I beseche all myghty Jhesu
hartely may be whanne it shall plese hym. Also good madame, and
it lyke you to wete, as on Friday next after Corpus Christi day
I intend unto the marte wardes, our blissid lorde be my spede
and helpe me +ter and send me good payment off all oure
dettours. And I beseche your ladyshipe to recommaund me unto my
mayster your husbaund. And I praye +te good lord to send me good
tidynges ffrom you bothe and ffrom all youres. Writen at Cales
the xvij day off Maii, (\An=o=. ut supra\) . 
   Be your ffeythffull servaunt, Thomas Betson.
   And I send your ladyshipe a token here inclosed, the which
youre ladishipe knowith right well.
   At my commynge ffrom the marte, with Godes grace, your
ladyshipe shall have more writynge ffrom me how I have spedd,
and in lyke wyse my mayster your husbaund: and our blissid lord
Jhesu Christ preserve you bothe in honour and worshipe vertuosly
to contenew to Godes plesour, and also to send you good and
proffitable counsell and grace to doo +ter after: this is and
shalbe my prayer for sothe every daye: your honour and worshipe
off contenewaunce here after stykkythe as nye myn hart as dothe
eny freind, man or o+ter about you, be my trouthe, our blissid
lord so helpe me. I will avyse you, madame, to remembre large
expensez and be ware of them, and in lyke wyse my mayster your
husbaund: it is well done ye remembre hym off them ffor 
<P II,48>
dyverse consederacions, as ye know bothe right well. And our
blissid lord be your comfforther and help in all your good
workes, Amen.
   To +te right honorable and my right Synguler good lady, Dame
Elsabeth Stonore, this letter be delyvered in hast. 
 
<Q STO 1478 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M>
<P II,48> 
[} [\212. THOMAS BETSON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\17 May, 1478\] 
   Jhesu. An=o= xviij=o=. 
   Right honorable and worshipfull Syr, I recommaunde me unto
your good maystershipe in the mooste convenyent wyse I best can
or maye: and ffer+termore, Syr, lykethe it you to wete that on
trenyte evynne I came to Cales, and thankid be +te good lord I
hade a ffull ffare passege: and, syr, with Godes myght I intend
as on Frydaye next to depart to the marte wardes. I beseche the
good lord to be my spede and helpe me in all my warkes. And,
syr, I truste to Godes mercy, yff the world be mery here, to doo
som whatt that shalbe bothe to your profette and mynne. As yit
+ter comethe but ffew merchantes here: here after with Godes
grace +ter will come moo. I shall lese no tyme whanne the season
shall come, I promytte you. And, syr, I beseche you +tat this
symple writynge may have me recommandid unto my lady your wiffe.
And I beseche the good lord to send you bothe good helthe and
vertuuse lyffynge, +terin longe to endewre to Godes plesour
And also, syr, I beseche you to be my good mayster and
ffeythffull loffer, as ever here to ffore to my knowlege I have
ffoundyn you. And, syr, I trust to God as ffor my parte so to
indevour me ffor your maystershipe +tat with Godes grace bothe
ye and my lady your wiffe shall well undyrstond and know that I
loffe bothe your worshipes, and your profett, and so it shall
prove in dede with Godes helpe. And, syr, whanne I come ffrom
the marte I shall send you word off all matters by the mercy off
our lord, who ever preserve your right worshipffull person in
longe helth and vertu, Amen. ffrom Cales the xvij day off May.
Be your servaunt
   Thomas Betson.
   To my right honorable and Synguler good mayster syr Willm.
Stonor, knyght, this letter be delyvered in hast. 

<Q STO 1478 GOXBRYGE>
<A GODDARD OXBRYGE>
<G M>
<P II,49> 
[} [\213. GODARD OXBRYGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\21 May, 1478\] 
   Right onerabulle and worschipefull sir, and myn aspesyalle
good maister, I rekomend me unto your good mastershipe in the
moste lowely wise that I beste can: sertefyinge your mastershepe
that I ame informyd by master Betson that Dave Wrykesame hathe
reportyd sarten langage by me in presens of my lady and on of
her brodiryn: and that is thus, that the seyd Daveht shold saye,
that I told heme that maister Betson schold tell me that he
laboryd to your maistership and to my lady to brynge the seyd
Davyht owte of your conseythe and favore: the whyche I take god
to rekord that I never at no sesun repordid enny shyche wordys
to the seyd Davethe, nor to nonodir person, and that wyll I
jostyfy as largely as enny trewe person owythe for to jostyfy
for a trowthe. And wan Mayster Betson told me of thys langege
that Dawyth repordyd by me, it came to my remembranse that
Daveth hathe sayd to me that maister Betson at Ester was a
twelmonthe was srevyn off hys goostly fadir, and that it was
geven heme in penanse that he shold aske the seyd Davyth
forgevenes of this that maister Betson schold make labor to your
mastershipe to brynge the seyd Daveth owte of your conseyt and
favore. And fardirmore, the seyd Davythe sayd to me that maister
Betson kowd nat have absolysyon of hys goostly fadir tyll he had
promysyd to brynge the sayd Dave in your favor as myche as he
was before. And thys seyd words Davyth hathe sayd to me, the
whyche maister Betson kene tell you more klerly by myn
enformemasyon. And Sir, I beseche your maistershipe to delyver
to John Burton the moneye the whyche is dewe to me by your
maistershepe: the money amonthe to the Summa x. li.: wherof I
resevyd of my lady at my departynge xl. s.: and so the reste is
viij. li. st. The whiche I beseche your maistership to delyver
to Burton: for I have wryttyn to heme wher he shall paye the
seyd money: the whyche payment I promyssyd to pay ther, as I
borowid it lenge or thys tyme: wherfore I beseche your
maistershype to remember me as sone as it shalle please you. And
I beseche your maistershipe to take no gret displesure in me 
<P II,50> 
of my neclygens that I have not wryttyn to your maistershype
before thys tyme: and yef I kowd a don your maisterschype anny
plesure of or servyse with my wryttyng, I wold a wrettun to you
before thys tyme: and yef ther be anye servyse that I kan do to
your mastership here in tyme to kome, yef it please you to let
me wette, it schalle be don without anny delaye, and that
knowyth God, whoo have you, Right worschipffull Sir, in hys
blessyd kepynge, Amen. At Cales, the xxj daye of May, A=o=
lxxviij.
   By your Servante Godard Oxenbryge.
   To +te Right onerabull and worschipfull, and myn aspesyall
god maister Stonore (\soyt d.d.\) 

<Q STO 1478 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M> 
<P II,53>
[} [\216. THOMAS BETSON TO DAME ELIZABETH STONOR\] }]
[\18 June 1478\]
   Jhesus. An=o= xviij=o=.
   Ryht honorable and my ryht synguler good lady, I recomaund me
unto your good ladyschipe in the mooste lowlyest wyse that I
best can or may, ever more desiryng to here and know off your
wellffare, the whiche I beseche almyghty Jhesu to preserve and
kepe to his plesour and to your mooste hartes desyre. And
ffer+ter more, liketh it your good ladyschipe to wete that this
same daye I come to London. And at my commynge home it was told
me how that my mayster your husband had bene verry sore seeke:
the which I know well hath not bene to your hartes comfforte,
nor also to the comfforte of your howsold: off the whiche ffor
sothe I am right sory. Nevertheles I undyrstond seth by dyverse
his maystershipe is right well amendid and well recovered: off
the which truly I am right joyffull and glad. And I beseche
Almyghty Jhesu send hym als vertuous helth as I wold have
myselff, and your good ladyshipe also. And yff I cowde do eny
thynge here that myght be to hys plesour and youres, I wold I
knew it and it shuld be done withouten ffayll. Truly your
discomfforth is nat myn comffort, God knowith it. Nevertheles
your ladyschipe muste cause hym to be mery, and off glade chere,
and to put awaye all ffantasyes and unthryfty thoughtes that
comes no good off but onely hurtffull. A man may hurt hymselff
by ryotouse meanes; it is good to be ware. Good madame, I besech
you to be off good chere, and I praye God comfforte you and send
you vertuous helth. And also I besech you to remembre my Cossen
Kateryn. I wold she did well, God knowithe it, and ye deme, as I
trowe, yff I had ffownd hir at home here my comfforte shuld have
bene the more: but I thannke God off all: my payn is the more: I
muste nedes suffer as I have done in tymes past, and so will I
do ffor Godes sayke and hirs. I send my mayster a dossen quayles
to ete: I praye God they may do hym good to God ward, and all
them that ete of them. I can send your ladischipe no deyntees: I
am but now comen home. And our blissid Lord preserve your good
ladishipe in vertu ever. Amen. At London the xviij day off June.
   Your servaunt T. Betson.
<P II,54>
   Madaym, Goddard Oxbryge recommaundes hym unto your ladyschipe
and prayethe you that ye wold woochsaveffe to speke to my
mayster your husband ffor his money. He desyred me to wryte
ffore it: it is well done +tat it be so paied ffor dyverse
causes: a Cossen of his shuld have it to pay it +ter as he owith
it. And our blissid Lord be with you, ever, ever, ever, Amen.
   To my Right worshipffull and Synguler good lady, dame
Elsabeth Stonor, at Stonor this be delyvered. 

<Q STO 1478 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M> 
<P II,56> 
[} [\218. THOMAS BETSON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\24 June 1478\] 
   Jhesus. A=no= xviii=o=. 
   Right honorable and worshipffull Sir, and my right synguler
good mayster, I recommand me unto your good maystershipe in the
mooste loffyngest wyse +tat my hart can thynnke, be my trouth:
thankynge your maystershipe right hartely off your curtesse and
loffynge letter, the which I have resseyvid by my M. your brodyr
John Croke. And in the same letter I undyrstond by the
worshipffull reporte off your maystershipe the havyors off my
Cussen Kateryn unto you, to my lady your wiffe and to all o+ter
&c.: and truly it is to me right joyffull and comffortable
gladnes so to here off hir, and I besech our blissid lord ever
to preserve hir in all vertu and good lyffynge to his plesour,
and to reward your maystershipe with hevene at your endynge ffor
your good disposision to hir wardes in good exortasions
gyffynge: and +tat I wote well off old, or elles truly she cowd
nat be off that disposision vertuous and goodly, hir youthe
remembrid and consederyd. And sir, +tus as it hath lykid your
maystershipe to commaunde me to come unto Stonor to se my best
belovid &c, and also to make me mery, unto the which your
maystershipe saith I shall be hartly welcume, and so my lady,
your wiffe, affermes the same as ye wryte it: Right worshipffull
sir, I know it ffull well off old, ffor so I have ffull oftyn
tymes preve it and nat gretely off me deservid, but God knowith
myn hart and myn entent what I intend to my power and ever hath
done: and sir, I besech your maystershipe to pardone me ffor a
whyle and to hold me exscused, and as sone as I can I shall
cumme and se your wellffare. I thynge longe, so God help me,
till I come, but be my trouth my labour and besynes is such and
will be a whyle, +tat I can nat as yit with myn ease cum: and
+terffore Sir, I besech you now to helpe me and to be my good
mayster and exscuse me, +ter as your maystershipe shall thynnke
best. And sir, in good ffeyth I am verry glad that my lady is so
well amendid off hir helth, and in lyke wyse the children. I
besech God ffor his 
<P II,57> 
mercy and our blissid lady to send your maystershipe and all
youres as well to ffare as I wold myn owneselff, and to preserve
you in vertuous lyffynge, and also to send you sad remembraunce
off all good begynnynge, and +tan with owte dowte ye shall make
with Godes helpe a worshipfull endynge to Godes plesour and to
+te honour and worshipe off all them +tat loffe you hartely.
Sir, I am to bold thus to wryte, but God knowith myn hart, and
som whattes I am infformed off the towardnes off your good
disposision, what ye intend: I shall dayly praye hartely to God
to be your good spede in all your such proffytable workes: yff
ye contenew your intent ye shall be glad +terof or this day iij
yere. I ffare lyke a sory pyper, whanne I begynne I can nat
leve: but yit ones agayn our blissid Lord be your sped and your
helpe. (\Le xxiiij jour de Juyn.\)
   Be your servant Thomas Betson.
   [\IN DORSO\] Sir, Remembre your maystershipe well what ye
have written off my Cossen Kateryn, truly I shall whanne I speke
with hir tell hir every word, and yff I ffynd the contrarye our
vycar here, so God helpe me, shall crye owte upon h[{ir{] within
this x wekes and lesse, and by that tyme I shall be redy in
every poy[{nt{] with Godes grace, and so I wold she were, ffor
sothe ye may beleve me off it.
   To the right honorable and my right spescyall good mayster,
Sir William Stonor, knyght, (\soyt dd.\) 

<Q STO 1478? RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M>
<P II,58> 
[} [\220. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\7 July (? 1478)\] 
<P II,59> 
   I recommaunde me to youre good mastership in my best maner:
besechyng of you this pore byll may recommaunde me to my
synguler good lady, my lady your wif, as your servaunt and
hirres. Syr, wher ye write on to me y shold take an accion in
the kynges name ayenst on of Wycomb for cuttyng down and fellyng
of certen treys, y have taken an accion redy, and y shall send
you the writte. Syr, ye wrote to me in your letter that ye hadde
seasid certen corne, whiche was regratyd and forstallid from the
comen marketes to the grete hurt of the Comen peple. Syr, me
semys by my lernyng ye may not sease not none maner cornes in
suche case and put thaym under arest: and if ye have don, yt
wold be well don to se thaym delyveryd ayen in manerly forme: it
is inquerable at the Cessons of pees and in every lete and
fraunchise of regrators and forstallers of all maner of vitaill,
and, if it be presentid, to make a fyne therfor: but it is not
the maner ne the care of the law to sease none forstallid ne
regratyd vitaill. I remit the delyng with the delyveraunce
hereof to your discreson: but y wold not ye confessid your self
to thaym that ye have mys don in that case: but honestly take a
promys of thaym [\that\] thay shall not dele so herafter, and
for this thay have don thay may be indited, and let thaym have
deliveraunce of thaire cornys. The Kyng purposeth as to morow to
be at Wendesor, and from thens to Notyngham. My lord Chamberleyn
rides to morue hame to Leycestre. Other news ben ther non her. I
pray God send you as well to fare as your hert can thynk. Writen
at London on seint Thomas ys day with the honde of your aune
   Page.
   To my master syr Willm. Stonor, knyght, be this deliveryd.

<Q STO 1478 RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M> 
<P II,60> 
[} [\221. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 12 July, 1478)\] 
   Right singuler good master, I recommaunde me to you, praying
the same this byll may recommaunde me to my lady, your wif. Syr,
your cosyn Hamden and my mastres, his wiff, have be with me,
shewyng that your plesyr shold be ther shold no proces go ayenst
Willm. Est of Wycombe, for whiche y kepe the writ in my handes
till unto the tyme y understond what y shall do and how y shalbe
demeanid: they bothe full manerly entretid me herein, shewyng me
your plesyr in the same without whiche ther shalbe no favour
shewid in my behalve. He is a courtes gentelman and your
kynsman, and my mastres, his wif, a worshipfull woman, and so
thay demenyd thaym in this mater not to do ne to attempt no
thynge to youre displesyr, whiche is to be remembrid. I remitt
this to yow, for as ye woll have it demenid so shall it be. And
thus fare ye well with all my hert. Writen at London on relic
Sonday with the honde of your
   Page.
   To my master, Syr Willm. Stonor, knyght.

<Q STO 1478 THENHAM>
<A THOMAS HENHAM>
<G M> 
<P II,60> 
[} [\222. THOMAS HENHAM TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\16 July 1478\] 
   Jhesu. A=no= lxxviii. 
   Ryght Reverent and worshypffull mayster, I recommaunde me
unto your goode maystershype, ever more desyryng to here off
your goode wellfare, +te wyche I be-sche Jhesu longe to continue
unto your hartys 
<P II,61> 
desyre. And fforder more, Syr, your maystershype shall
understonde that ther hys shypyde towarde unto Calys in your
name, Syr Wyllm. Stonor, knythe, and Thomas Betson, in the Jhesu
off London, John Lolyngton mayster under God, Summa ij=m= iiij
C. xlviij Cottes felles. Forder more your mayster schalle
understonde that I sende dow[{n{]e by John Talbose, your
sarvaynte: Itm. your demy gowne off chamelet; Itm. your demy
gowne off blake pewke lynde with grene wellffete; truste in a
shete. Forder more, Syr, ye shall understonde that masterys Hane
hys well amendyde, blesyde by Jhesu, and hys in goode hallthe.
Forder more, Syr, your maystershype shall understonde that the
hale brewer callys apone me dayly sore ffore monay, the wyche I
have wretyn unto your maysterschype affor tyme, the Somma ys v.
li. and hode monay, the wyche he besekys your maysterschype that
he mythe have some monay in hande unto the tyme that your
maysterschype come unto London. All so, Syr, I beseke your
maysterschype +tat ye wylle remember your brede baker at London,
ffor he callys apone me daylle ffor monay, the wyche some hys
xxxv. s. and iiij d. No more unto your maysterschype at thys
tyme, butt all mythy Jhesu have you in hys kepyng. Wretyn at
London the xvj day off Jullii.
   By your prentes Thomas Henham.
   Unto my Rygh honorable and myne in spesyale goode Mayster Syr
Willm. Stonor, Knyght, In +te maner at Stonor thys be delyvered.
dd. 

<Q STO 1478 TBETSON>
<A THOMAS BETSON>
<G M> 
<P II,63> 
[} [\224. THOMAS BETSON TO DAME ELIZABETH STONOR\] }]
[\31 July, 1478\]
<P II,64>
   Jhesus. A=o= xviij
   Right honorable and my right synguler good lady, I recommaund
me unto your good ladischipe. And, Madam, yff it lyke you, seth
I come home to London I mette with my lady, your modyr, and God
wote she made me right sulleyn chere with hir countenaunce
whyles I was with hir: me thought it longe till I was departid.
She brayke unto me of old ffernyeres, and spescially she brayke
to me off the tayll I told hir betwene the vicar +tat was and
hir: she said the vicar never ffared well seth, he tooke it so
mych to hart. I told hire a lyght answere ageyn, and so I
departid ffrom hir. I had no joye to tary with hir. She is a
ffyn mery woman, but ye shall nat know it nor yit ffynd it, nor
none of youres by that I se in her. Modyr mydwiffe told me +tat
nowdyr my lady your modyr, my lady Stoker, nor hir husbaund come
ones to se my cossen Anne sethe she come to hir, nor yet axse
ones how she ffared, and yff my lady, your modyr, mete my cossen
Anne she will say no more but "Godes blissynge have ye and
myne," and so goo hir waye fforthe as thow she had no joye off
hir. Whanne ye come to London I shall tell you more. My cossen
Anne hath bene with me here at home, and she is hole and right
well amendid and as a woman shulde be, +ter is no fawte, our
blissid lord be thannkyd and his blissid modyr. Good Madam, by
the next at comes lett hir have all hir clothes, she hath nede
unto them, and that knowith owre lord, who ever preserve you,
Madam, and all yours in longe helth and vertu to his plesour. At
London the last day off Juyll, (\A=no= supra\) .
   Be your servaunt Thomas Betson.
   Jentil Madam, I beseche you that I may be recomaundid unto my
cossen, your dou+ghter Kateryn, and our lord be with you both.
Also, Madam, yff it lyke you, I have bene with my brodyr, John
Betson, ffor money, and be my trouth I can none have off hym, he
hath shewid me that my Mayster your husbaund and ye owe hym ffor
dyverse wynes, Summa xij. li. vj. s. viij. d., as by the
parcells herin closed more clerelyar it appereth, the which
parcelles my brodyr saith that +tei be trew. Wherffore, good
Madam, I beseche you to speke unto my mayster, to the intent I
myght have the money here as shortely as can be. I muste pay to
John Tate vj li. for +te felles that I have shippid now, and to
Whyte of Bradway I muste pay iiij li., and I muste pay to the
porters and o+ter for costes xl s. And so God save my soull I
have it nat. I will nat be so bare agayn of money a good whyle,
with Godes grace. It was the best dett I saw in his booke, so
God help me, and +terffore I tooke 
<P II,65>
it over unto me ffor payment, and I hold me plesed with all.
Jhesu preserve you ever, Amen.
   To my right honorable and Synguler good lady, Dame Elysabeth
Stonor (\soyt. dd.\) [^COPY OF A BILL OMITTED^]

<Q STO 1478 THENHAM>
<A THOMAS HENHAM>
<G M> 
<P II,65> 
[} [\225. THOMAS HENHAM TO DAME ELIZABETH STONOR\] }] 
[\1 August, 1478\] 
   Jhesu. An=o=. xviij 
   Right Reverent and worschypfull lady, I recomaunde me unto
your goode ladyschyp, evermore desyring ffor to her off your
goode wellfare, the wyche I besche Jhesu longe to continue unto
your hartys desyre &c. Fordermore, lady, ye schalle understonde
that I have sent downe by William Somer, bargemane of London,
your beme and ij calys, the 
<P II,66> 
wyche I wrothe a bylle unto William Platys off that he schulde
resayve yt at Hendelay and so conevay yt unto Stonor.
Fordermore, lady, ye schalle understonde that maysterys Hane,
your dowter, ys all moste hole, thankyd by Jhesu, and sche hys
very mery. All so, lady, I beseke your goode ladyschype that I
mythe have cnowlage whedir that ye wollede have hany bere or
hale, that I schulde take in ayenst your comyng home unto
London. No more unto your ladyschype at thys tyme but Jhesu have
you in hys kepyng. Wretyn at London the ffyrst day of Agust.
   By your prentes Thomas Henham.
   Unto my Ryght Reverent and Worschypfull dame Elysabeth Stonor
thys letter be delyvered in hast, dd. 

<Q STO 1478 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,66> 
[} [\226. DAME ELIZABETH STONOR TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(21 August, 1478)\] 
   Jhesus. 
   Ryght enterly and my moste specyall belovyd husband, I
recomaunde me to yow yn the moste harty wyse, desyryng to here
of yowre welefare &c., thankyng yow of yowre lettyr and of yowre
partrechys. And for Robert Warner, he ys cum to towne: dyverce
of yowre servantys and myne have spoken with hym: he seyeth that
he can receyve no money as yet, notwithstondyng he yntendyth to
speke with me or he departe, and wyll content me yef he may. I
pray God that he may so do. Also I pray yow to send me a answere
of the mater that I wrote to yow for the Lumbarde. And yef hyt
myght plese yow to take the labur to ryde ovyr, then ye may
answere to the mater yowre selfe, whyche wyll be to me grete
hartes ese and plesure: for I thynke hyt ryght longe syth I
speke with yow. Syr, I truste to Jhesu to se yow here yn shorte 
<P II,67>
tyme. No more to yow at thys tyme, [{but{] Jhesu preserve yow yn
hys kepyng. Wrytyn at Lundun the Fryday afore sent Bartylmewys
day.
   By your owne wyff Elysabeth Stonore.
   To my most enterly belovyd husband Syr Wylliam Stonore,
knyght. 

<Q STO 1478 ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,68> 
[} [\229. DAME ELIZABETH STONOR TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\5 October, 1478\] 
   Jhesu. An=o= xviij=o= 
   Right best and hartely well belovid husbond, I recommaund me
unto you with all myn hart, lettynge you wete that I am right
well amendid, I thannke god +teroff: and on Sonday last past I
was at the 
<P II,69> 
chirche at my ffadyrs deryge, and soppid with my modyr the same
nyght. And Syr, yeff I had ones done my pilgramages I reke nat
how sone I were with you at Stonor: and +terffore, gentyll Syr,
I praye you +tat ye ffayll nat to send me myn horsse on
Settyrday next. And also I praye you to remembre the matter I
spake to you off at your departynge: ffor with owte that, I can
nat with your worshipe and myn depart London: ffor Cobbe call
apon me dayly ffor money, and the bere wyffe with o+ter, as I
told you. And also I praye you to remembre my sonne Betson: ffor
he hath mych a doo with money now, and he trustith veraly to
your promesse: ffor Godes sake, syr, lett hym nat be forgotten.
My modyr and my broodyr Stooker recomaunde hem both right
hartely unto you: and ffull ffayn they wold +tat ye had bene
here, yff it myght have bene your ease. And as ffor me I wold
nat that ye were here, ye know it well enowgh: neverthelesse
ffor soth what som ever I wryte I wold I were at Stonor: ffor
truly I am veray wery off London, ffor my son Betson intendes to
ryde in to the countre, now whenne I come home: and he is ffast
ryggynge hym +ter ffore, so that at many tymes I am post a
loyne, and that causeth me to thynnke the more ellynger: and
+terffore, good syr, remembre myn horsse on Setterday with owte
ffawte. My son Betson and his wiffe recommaunde them unto you:
and he told me that he hath bought here in London seth ye
departid v. sacces Cottes. ffor a part redy money and the rest
at mydsomer next: I undyrstond it is a good bargayn. God lenne
grace, who preserve you ever in vertu and longe helth to Godes
plesour. The v day off Octobre.
   By your ovne wyff D. Elysabeth Stonore.
   Unto Ryght Reverent and worschyppefull Cosyn Syr Wyllm.
Stonor, knyght, in the manor at Stonor, thys letter be delyverd.
dd. 

<Q STO 1478? HDOGETT>
<A HENRY DOGETT>
<G M> 
<P II,70> 
[} [\231. HENRY DOGETT TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\24 Dec. (? 1478)\] 
   Ryght worshepfull and my goode and feithfull maister, after
dew recomendacion pleasith yow to wete +tat my clerke and your
servaunte have been at Abendon with the vicar of Seynt Elyns to
have leverey of your cuppe, and offurred hym x. li. acordyng to
your writeyng: and he
<P II,71> 
answered them that he wold not deliver the said cuppe with owte
the bille indented +tat is made bytwene yow be brought upon the
deliveraunce: and to have sewrete for the residew of the money
to be paid at Candelmas next. I remitte all to your maistershep
and wysedome. The said x. li. shall be redy at eny tyme that ye
like, havyng fro your maistershep a writeyng to be content ayen
by Ester next comynge. And God preserve yow, my good lady, your
wyfe, and all yours. At Aston, a Cristemas yeve with the hand of
your servaunt
   Henry Dogett.
   To my maister, Syr Willm. Stonore, knyght.

<Q STO 1479 WHERWARD>
<A WILLIAM HERWARD>
<G M> 
<P II,71> 
[} [\232. WILLIAM HERWARD TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? Jan. 1479)\] 
   Maister Stonor, I recommende to you, mervelynge that ye wryte
me with any poynt of strayngenesse syn tyme +tat I have
fulfylled your poyntment in your letters as touchyng to +te
money lent for suche days as ye desyred and longer, and as the
poyntment last taken, when my servant Stephen Hosyer was with
youe, I aggreed, but when Harry Dokettes servantes came to me
+ter was noon obligacion, and by cause +ter off I supposed +tat
+tey came not as sufficiently instructe in your appoyntment, but
now I have delyverd your cuppe safe and sownde to your
servantes, Thomas Matthew and William Belsun, and have recevyd
of them x. lib. for halfe my due and an obligacion of x. lib.
for +te remynant: but I trust in your Maistership of a shorter
day of payment, for I borowed xx marcs of the same money: and
+towe ye be patron of Bruscote, I understande +tat well and pray
for you dayly, but I laste a benyfice better to me +tan +tat is,
for +te gret desyre of Maister Thomas Forster; therfor I pray
you accepte not me as a stranger, for I can do as good servyce
as som o+ter. (\Valete in domino per Willm. Herward, capellanum
vestrum.\)
   To his worshipfull maister Syr William Stonor Kny. 

<Q STO 1479? THAMPTON>
<A THOMAS HAMPTON>
<G M> 
<P II,75>
[} [\236. THOMAS HAMPTON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\2 Jan. (? 1479)\] 
<P II,76>
   Ryht worshypfull and feythfully lovyng Cosyn, I recomaunde
unto you. Syr, I was enformed by my sone Froste that hit lyked
you upon cominicacon had between you and Waller that ye lete hym
understonde in brefe termes, yef hym lyked the mariage betwen
your kynneswoman and hym, that he shold make hyr joyntour of
xx=ti=. li. worth londe acordyng to hys owne promyse, and elles
ye lete hym understonde he shold no ferther enter in cominicacon
in the mater: and when he understode your decre and jugement, he
was therto agreable. Syr, I understonde he entendeth to be with
me in ij days after the xij=th= day. Syr, me thoght by
informacion of my sone Froste that he entendeth in most hasty
wyse to be maried: wherfor me semyth, savyng your better advyse,
that hit ys me to desyre of hym to be bounden and sum persons
with hym, that he shall be Ester day then next folowyng do make
hyr suer of hyr joyntour. Syr, that hit may plese you to lemyte
me in what sum I may desyr them to be bounden yn, I pray send me
word by my servaunt, the brynger of thys letter, and how longe
ye entend to be aboute home efter the xij=th= tyde. And good
syr, that thys my sympyll wrytyng may recommaund me to my good
Cosyn, my lady your wyfe, and Jhesu preserve you. Wryten in hast
at Oldstoke the ij day of Januer,
   By your owne Thomas Hampton.
   To my Right worshypfull Cosyn, Syr William Stonor, be this
letter delivered. 

<Q STO 1479? ELSTONOR>
<A ELIZABETH STONOR>
<G F>
<P II,76> 
[} [\237. DAME ELIZABETH STONOR TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\26 March (1479)\] 
<P II,77> 
   My best beloved housbond, I recommaunde me unto you in my
moost herty wyse, desyring to her of your welfare, and trusted
verayly to have had you at home on our Lady day by night: yf ye
had be, I wold have trusted ye shuld had the warde and
possession of Lovels doughters or this, for whoom Stodolf, the
quenes attourney, rodde on Tuesday last all night towardes the
Kinges grace. And yf ye wol spede you home to speke with hym at
his comyng I doubte nat but ye shal have the oon at the leste,
for I undrestand +tay be not wardes ney+ter to the King nor
quene: praying you +terfore to spede you home, for undrestand he
wolbe with Bryan to night or to morow without fayle. Also for
all suche Stiwardships ye wrotte unto me for, thay wer graunted
a way in his lyf tyme or he discessed. As for the Stewardship of
Henley, I canne nat tell whe+ter it be goo or noo: wherfore Vyne
shal ryde according to your commaundement. Syr, I thanke you
hertyly for your veneson +tat ye wrotte to me to receyve: how be
it as yet I have nat receyved. Over +tis the parson of Falley
dissessed yorsterday in the mornyng, and +te parson of Hamelden,
and Syr William, prest +tere, be executours. No more unto you at
this tyme, but the holy Trynyte preserve you. Wryten at Stonor,
whan I wold fayne have sleped, +te morow after our Lady day in
+te mornyng. Syr, I send you your botes and your cloke, for +ter
hath be a wete weder here syth ye departed.
   By your owne wyff Elysabeth Stonore.
   To my best beloved housbond Sir William Stonor, Knyght. 

<Q STO 1479? RICHARD3>
<A DUKE OF GLOUCESTER> 
<G M>
<P II,81> 
[} [\243. RICHARD, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR AND
HUMPHREY FOSTER, OR FORSTER, THE ELDER.\] }] 
[\9 July (? 1479)\] 
R. Gloucestre. 
   The duc of Gloucestre, gret Chamberleyn, Constable, and
Admirall of England.
   Right trusty and well beloved, We grete you wele, and desire
and hertely pray you, that incontynent after the sight herof it
woll like you at this our instaunce to cause to come afore you
William Idley and Elizabeth, his Suster, and demaund them the
cause why they content and pay not to our right welbeloved
servaunt, Anne Idley, Maistres of our Nurcery, her annuitee of
v. marcs, graunted for terme of her lyff of the Manor of
Drayton, and advise them, as they woll avoid our grevouse
displeasure, to see her aswele +terof yerely contented as of
+tat she is behinde unpaied of the same. And of theire
disposicions in this behalve 
<P II,82> 
We hertely pray you to asserten Us in as goodly hast ye may, as
our speciall trust is in you, and as We may do thing at your
desires herafter. And our lord kepe you. Yoven under our signet
at our Castell of Middelham the ix=th= day of Juyll. J. Kendale.
   To our right trusty and welbeloved Sir William Stonor,
knight, and Humfrey Foster, thelder, squier, and aither of them.

<Q STO 1470S HDOGETT>
<A HENRY DOGETT>
<G M> 
<P II,83> 
[} [\245. HENRY DOGETT TO (? STONOR)\] }] 
[\(date uncertain)\] 
   Syr, as for the mater bytweme me and Crofte [\?\] ye
undirstond my writeyng that I shold have all the tythes except
of the demayn lond in Chalford: I clayme no more but all this
tythe, hey as well in Chalford [{as{] the corne out of Chalford,
acordyng to my writeyng: I undirstond that he hath the
countrepanes of my writeyng, and yef I were prior as he is I
wold have the countrepane of his writeyng. Syr, I pray yow that
I may have a copy of his writeyng, and suche rewle as ye like to
set betwene us I wol obey hit in the said mater. How be hit I
was offered iiij marcs to lese my tytle in the said tythes, for
be cause hit is well worth xl (^s.^) a year. I remitte all to
yow, my goode and feithfull maister,
   Your old servaunt H. Dogett.
[\NO ENDORSEMENT.\] 

<Q STO 1479? RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M> 
<P II,85> 
[} [\247. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\25 Sept. (1479)\] 
   My ryght synguler good Master, after dew recommendacion, like
it you to wete that all your servauntes and tenauntes in thes
parties fare well, and I recommaunde thaym to your mastership,
and so do we all to my lady your wif. The cause of my writyng to
your mastership is this: it is so that I have the gift of the
presentacion of the Vicarage of Sutton bysydes your maner, and
for that feith and service that your chaunterie prest of Horton,
Syr William, beres to your mastership, y have geven hym the
benefice, so it be your plesyr. Syr, ther ys a frere prechour
off thabbey of Dertford, is name is frere Hugh Fabri, whiche y
have allway aught my verry good will and favour onto, and so
does Appelton, Martyn, and all the gentelmen in oure parties. I
certifye your mastership he is a good prest, and a clene, ther
is non better to my understandyng unfaynyd. Syr, if it wold
plese your mastership to write a letter to the master of Cobham
that it were your plesyr, he shold succede syr William in your
Chaunterie, it wold be to the grete comfort of all the gentelmen
in thes parties; and over that ye shall have the dayly praier of
a good prest, ther was never non suche ther syns I knew Kent. By
my trowth undoutyd my lord bysshop wold have geven hym a
benefice, but he woll non have. I pray your mastership to tendre
this mater the rather at this my pore instance. I thank your
mastership for my buk. I dar incombre you no longer. I pray
Jhesu send you all youre goodly hertes desire. Writen at your
Horton this xxv day of Septembr with the fest of your
   Page.
   Syr, Lestan, your fermer, understode that y wrote to your
mastership, cam onto me and desirid me to remembr yow for hym:
if it plese you, it is thus, he is suffisaunt within your
distres, he woll content your mastership at Martynmas xx. li.,
if ye geve hym laysyr, he shall now pay your mastership well and
suffisauntly, and if ye be hasty uppon hym he 
<P II,86> 
must sel his graynys at mischef, and in concluson undon. He is
sore ferd of your Steward: he hath promisid me he will content
your mastership this same yere xl. li. Plese it yow to send me
oon litel word here. 
   To my master Syr Willm. Stonor, knyght for the kynges body. 

<Q STO 1479 THENHAM>
<A THOMAS HENHAM>
<G M> 
<P II,89> 
[} [\251. THOMAS HENHAM TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\10 October, 1479\] 
   Jhesu A=no= xix 
   Ryght honorable and worshypfull mayster, I recommaunde me
unto your goode mayster in the most lowest wyse that I best cane
or may, ever more desyring to here off your goode wellfare, the
wyche I be-sche Jhesu long to continue unto your hartys dysire.
Forder more, syr, ye scholle understonde that my mayster Thomas
Betson hys ryght welle amendyde, blesyde by Jhesu; and he hys
paste all dowtys of sekens, and he takys +t=e= sostenanse ryght
welle: and as for ffusecyons, ther come none unto hym, ffor he
hase no nede of them. Syr, ye shall understonde that my mayster
Syr Wylliam Stoker comaunde hym unto your maysterschype, and my
lady hys wyffe. And as ffor schuche 
<P II,90> 
thyngys as your mayster wrothe unto hym by master Bryane, hyt
schalle be aplyde, and sent unto your mayster: ffor he says he
wylle sende you none but goode: and as ffor your rede wyne, hyt
schall be schyped upon Tewysday next comys: and as ffor your
rondelet off Mallsay, yt thys not rede as yet, +tor mayster Syr
Wyllm. Stoker hathe comyng a schype with Mallsay and hoder swet
wyne, and he lokys ffor the same schype every day, and yeff so
be that that the same schype come note betwene thys and Tewysday
next comys he wylle porffay ffor your maysterschype a rondelet
off Mallsay schuche as he may get in the sete, and hyt schall be
schyppyde with your rede wyne. Fordermore, Syr, ye schall
understonde that I resayved a letter ffrom your mayster by
mayster Bryane, the wyche I schall do accordyng as your wryting
dothe spesyffide. No more unto your maysterschype at thys tyme,
but all mythe Jhesu have you in hys kepyng. Wreten at Stepenay,
the x day off Octtobr.
   By your prentes Thomas Henham.
   To my Ryght Worschypfull maister, Syr Wyllm. Stonor, knyght,
thys letter be delyvrde d.d. 

<Q STO 1479 HUNTON>
<A HUGH UNTON>
<G M>
<P II,91> 
[} [\253. HUGH UNTON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 26 October, 1479)\] 
   Right worshipfull Maister, I recomaunde me unto you. And Syr,
the case is so that yong Wagge nowe apon Saterday last passet
hase comyn and take possession in a corner of a feld of a trew
wedowe and bedewoman of yours, Robert Oxlades moder, concernyng
the title of all hir place: the which woman hase ben in pesibill
possession thes iij score yeres and more, as her sone Robert can
more pleynly enfourme your maistership. And Syr, the lond is
entaylet as fayre as eny can be unto the heires males, and hase
been thes C. yeres. Syr, I beseche you be hir gud Maister in hir
rigth, and to hir power she shall deserve hit. Wagge makys gret
manasse to distres hir catell within thes iij or 
<P II,92> 
fawre dayes. Syr, and ye send me a bill to withstond him, I will
do my power: for as by parall she has enfeffet your maistership,
M. Cotesmore, Herre Doget, me, and William Est. And Syr, I
beseche you hold me excuset that I come not unto your
maistership: I am a litill diseset for to ride. And almigthty
God preserve you, my lady, and all your housholde, the Monday
afore Simon and Jude.
   Your servaunt, Hugh Unton.
   To my right worshipfull Maister, Sir William Stonor, Knyght. 

<Q STO 1479 ABASYNGTHW>
<A ALEXANDER BASYNGTHWAYTE> 
<G M>
<P II,92> 
[} [\254. ALEXANDER BASYNGTHWAYTE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\12 Nov. 1479\] 
   Jhesu. 
   Reverent and wurchipfull Syr, after all dew recommendacion, y
recommaund me unto your Maisterchipe desyryng to here of your
wylfar, the wych Almyghty Jhesu preserve and kepe to hys plesour
and your hertes desyre. Forthermor letyng your Maisterchip to
have in consideracyon that y stonde in sych a nessescyte at hys
tyme, the wyche withowt y have your help and your socowr it wyll
be unto me gret hurt and henderans: for y most pay to my
son-y-lawe a C. li. or Crystysmas day, the wych y beseke yowr
Maisterchipe to remember me in my ned acordeng to yowr old
promys: for withowt ye help me, y wot wyll y may not kepe my
hows. Syr, also my servant can infourm your Maisterchyp of my
grevans. Also prayng you that thys sympoll byll may recommaund
me unto my good lady your wyff. No mor to you at thys tym, but y
beseke Jhesu hau you in hys kepyng. Wretyn at London, the
xij=th= day of November, A=o=. E. iiij=ti= xix=mo=.
   Be your own servant Alix. Bassyngtwhait.
   To ... mayster Syr William Stonor, knyght, thys be delivered
in hast. 

<Q STO 1479? HDOGETT>
<A HENRY DOGETT>
<G M> 
<P II,94> 
[} [\256. HENRY DOGETT TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\31 December (? 1479)\] 
   My good and feythfull maister, I recomaund me to yow with all
my service. I undirstond by your writeyng that the Kyng and
o+ter the lordes be right well plesid with your worshipfull
demenyng: of the wheche I am right glad. And also that my lord
Chaunceler is your good lord and councellyth you to your grete
worship and avayle. God defende yow fro sinustre councell. My
said lordes advyse and councell is full frutes and profitable
for yow, as I have hadde very knowleche: I pray God contynue
hym. And where ye like to write to me to come to your
maistershep I was not wele disposed to ride this many day, as
Godd knoweth. Praying yow that ye woll take no displeser, I send
yow by my servaunt xx markes: I have right lytyll mone; how be
hit yef ye nede I woll purvey more ayenst Monday next, and send
hit to your maistershep with Goddes mercy, who ever preserve 
<P II,95> 
yow, my good and feithfull maister. Wreton at Pusey a Neweyeres
yeve, with the hond of your old servaunt,
   H. Dogett.
   Syr, John Wagge kan enforme your maistershep of my disese &c.
   To my maister syr Will. Stonore, Kny[{ght{] .

<Q STO 1480 AWYDESLADE>
<A ANNYS WYDESLADE>
<G F> 
<P II,100> 
[} [\262. ANNYS WYDESLADE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(early in 1480)\] 
   Right worshipfull Maister, y hertly comaund me unto you with
alle suche servise as y can or may: thonking you of youre
kyndnesse shewed unto me, so pore a woman as y am, and unto your
Maystershyp owndeserved: desyring to hire of youre welfare, the
which y pray alle mighty Godde to preserve you to youre most
pleasure and hertis desire. Please you to have enknowliche of my
power welfare: at the making of this my letter y was in gode
hele, and y trust in God within short space to be beter: for now
y am at my liberte, wherof I thanke you, in my own hous at
Exeter. The ffesisicion wolle do his cunnyng uppon me, but
undertake me he wol not, nor never did noon in his liff. Cumfort
in 
<P II,101> 
hym I fynde, and in my mynde y thinke he wolle do me gode.
Furthermore the deling of my ffader in law ye shal have
enknowliche by a bille, which Thomas Mathu shal deliver you. A
very yeynd betwyn hym and me wolle not be had into the tyme of
youre comyng, which y trust wolle not be longe. Me thinkith a M.
yere gon that y hurd any tidinges fro you. And in gode feith ye
may sey unto me that y am own-kynde that y wrote nor send unto
you synnes youre last being at Wideslade. The cause is, for myn
excuse is y have be in helle, where y had litel cumfort, but as
sone as y cam to Exeter then was y yn heven: and be cause that y
am now in joy y do send you this letter. Maister, hit is so that
the ffesicion is in hondes with me, and he desirith to have me
in cure iij monythis, for which cause I pray you remember your
Worship and my poor Queste. And as y amend y shal put you in
knowlich by the grace of Jhesu, who kepe you.
   ffrom your tru lover Annys Wydeslade.
   To his right worshipfull Maister Syr William Stonore, Knyght,
be this delivered. 

<Q STO 1480 RGERMYN>
<A RICHARD GERMYN>
<G M> 
<P II,105> 
[} [\268. RICHARD GERMYN TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(13 May, 1480)\] 
   Right Wurshipfull and Onerable Maister, y comaund me unto
you. And where as ye wrete unto me to deliver youre letters in
to the Gentilmen that thei be derected unto in Devonshire and
Cornwale unto a trust a man, I shalle so deliver hem that youre
wille and intent shal be ffulfilled. And as yet Worthe hath not
entred nor noght he shalle. Moreover, y late wrote you a letter
and send him by oon John Symon, which gave you the orenges and
marmelate at Exeter: which letter was delivered unto Lannos,
skynner, in asmoche as ye be not at London. Y trust ye have him.
Also ye wrete unto me to have youre plate, which is with Maister
John at wille: at your letteris deliverans he was not at home,
but before Midsomer y schal bringe hit to London pakked in the
carior's pakke of Exeter: so bi the grace of God y schal deliver
you me seilf. And accordinge to your letter y shal promyse to
content him at Midsomer quarter of your Rentes. Furthermore I
have moved Speke, that ye comaundede me to reseve l. s. for this
Ester rent, he sayinge this wordes: that ye at your departinge
promysed him to sende your letter for his discharge under seale,
or els he to pay no mony. So of him can y have no mony. Moreover
he saith, that he 
<P II,106> 
can holde no Courte at Wonford in to the tyme ye su a Travers.
And y teld hym so ye have done, and offered to have delivered
him the writte which ye delivered me. At Tawnton on Saturday
after Assencion day in hast,
   Youre servant, Richard Germyn.
   To my right wurshipfull and onerable Maister, Syr William
Stonore, knyght, be this delivered. 

<Q STO 1480 WELMES>
<A WALTER ELMES>
<G M>
<P II,106>
[} [\269. WALTER ELMES TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\1480\] 
   After my dewe recomaundacion, &c. M=r=. Page recomaundyth him
to yow, prayyng yow to send the Bukk to Warde, Shreve and
Aldyrman of London, dwellyng on Canynggesstrete, wher that Syr
Rauff Joslyn dwellyd, and that Jamys myte kary hit: to whome I
pray yow to take xx d., and I shall content hit, for the
karyage, for Master Page wyllys me so to do. And Jhesu kepe yow.
   Y=ors= to my power, W. Elmes.
   To the Ryth Wurshipfull Syr W. Stonor K.

<Q STO 1480? RDREWE>
<A RICHARD DREWE>
<G M> 
<P II,106>
[} [\270. RICHARD DREWE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(1480)\] 
<P II,107> 
   Ryght worschypfull Master, y recommaunde me onto you, doyng
yow to wete that Master Malyverer hath take an accyon off a
Counte agayn your bayly off Ermyngton by the informacyon off on
Sowche, chere clerke onto the sayde Master Malyverer, and thay
wolde compell your bayly to acounte wyth the sayde Scherve off
the mercement wythyn your hunderd and to compell your bayly to
geder the mercement wythyn the sayde hunderd: and that was never
don hebeffore: therfore y beseche your Masterschyp to se the
mene at thys terme, that y may be dyschargyd off thys accyon
that ys agayn me, and off the whyche mater Thomas Mathew can
infourme yow, for he hath byn your bayly afore thys tyme.
Y-wrytyn att Ermyngton by your bayly,
   Rychard Drewe.
   Thys byll be deliveryd onto my Master, Syr Wyllyam Stoner, in
hast. 

<Q STO 1480? WGOLDWYN>
<A WILLIAM GOLDWYN>
<G M>
<P II,107> 
[} [\271. WILLIAM GOLDWYN TO JOHN BYRELL\] }] 
[\12 June (1480)\] 
<P II,108> 
[^PRESCRIPTIONS OMITTED^] 
   Syr, I recommende me unto yow, prayng yow as hertely as I may
+tat ye have over sy+gthe in +te servyng of +tys byll, as my
truste is in yow: for +tys ys for a specyall Mastres of myn. And
with +te grace of God hit schall not be longe or I see yow. And
+ten I purpose for to tary with yow. Wrytyn at Stoner +te xij
day of June.
   M=r=. W. Goldwyn.
   To John Byrell +te eldur, Poticary, Duellyng in Bucklers
Bury, be +tys byll delyverde. 

<Q STO 1480 RGERMYN>
<A RICHARD GERMYN>
<G M> 
<P II,108> 
[} [\272. RICHARD GERMYN TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(4 July, 1480)\] 
   Right worshipfull and Onerable Maister, y comaund me unto you
with alle suche servyse as y can or may. Please your
Maistershipp have enknowliche, y have delivered your letters to
John Hochyn and to William Baker: and y have caused them to
wrete unto you a aunswer, which ye shalle reserve with this.
Baker hath crese cloth, canvas hath he noon, which ye shall have
and ye wille: but I wol advise you to by hit not to dure.
Furthermore, William Baker told me,
<P II,109> 
when y com home, that Worthe hath promysed his son to mary with
Richard Pomeray. But y can not thinke hit be so, for thei be
within gre of mariage iij=de= and iiij=e=. He hath made his bost
syne he cam home, as Colwodele teld me, that he wol have Wolston
or this somer be don. Many men questyn me where he was thurgh
with you or no. And so did M. Speke also. And y told him what
poyntment was made betwyne you and hym this terme. Your servant,
Thomas Haiward of Wolston, spake with his man Wyse: and he teld
him that his Maister is ful determed in his mynde to set upon
you in hast, yef ye acorde not. After my sympel advise hit were
wel don this somer, that ye cam unto Wolston, and my lady with
you, and to ly there: ye have whete y-now there for a while: hit
shuld cause you to have love of the Gentilmen of the Shere, and
Comyns also: and after that ever to have hit in pease. And so y
trust ye shal, for all this his longage. And as I have more
enknowliche of this mater, or of any other perteynyng unto you,
y shal by the grace of Jhesu sende you worde, who kepe you,
Amen. At Exeter, un Tuesday before Seint Thomas day.
   From youre Servaunt, Richard Germyn.
   To my right Wurshipfull and Onerable Maister, Syr William
Stonere, Knyght, be this letter delivered in hast.

<Q STO 1480? HCOLET>
<A HENRY COLET>
<G M> 
<P II,109> 
[} [\273. HENRY COLET TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\7 July (? 1480)\] 
   Right worshipfull Syr, I comaunde me unto you, and letyng you
wete that I have receyvet your letter send to me by Hugh Unton,
by the which letter I understond ye desire a gretter somme than
ye graunt hir me by mouth your awne self. Syr, the trouth is
this - I will aply somwhat to your intent: ye shall have for hir
mariage and all the rigth that shal long to hir sex score pound:
and wher ye desire me to gete 
<P II,110> 
yow ij suertes, ye shall have my service, and that ye shall well
understond at oure next metyng. And how ye will be demenet of
this child, I pray you send me word what I shall trust unto: for
ye may understond by my writyng that I owe a love to the child,
and loth to displese you. Syr, I have a bill deliveret me for
payment made by you to Thomas Prat of Henley of xx. li., the
which ye owe my lady Mountford: of the which bille ye and I
shall agree well opon at oure next metyng. And almighty God have
you in his kepying. Written at London opon Seint Thomas Day at
nyght at vij of Clok,
   be yowur owne Harry Colet.
   To the right worshipfull syr Willyam Stonor, knyght, be thys
delivered. 

<Q STO 1480 WGOLDWYN>
<A WILLIAM GOLDWYN>
<G M>
<P II,110> 
[} [\274. WILLIAM GOLDWYN TO LADY STONOR\] }] 
[\18 July (1480)\] 
   Right worschypful and to me Synguler good lady, I recommende
me unto yow: prayng yow to sende me a buck a Wedynsday next
commyng acordyng to +te promyse that my Master and ye made at my
laste beyng with yow: for a specyall frende of myn schall be
maryde on Thursday nexte commyng, to +te wyche I have promysyde
a buck: wherfor I pray yow +tat he be not dispoyntyd. And my
service schall be +te more redyer to yow at all tymys with +te
grace of God, wyche have yow in kepynge. Wryttyn in haste +te
xviij day of Jule,
   By your servant, William Goldwyn.
   Madam, I pray yow to speck to my Master for +te xvj. li. +tat
ys dew unto me.
   To my lady Stonor, Be thys delyverede in haste. 

<Q STO 1480 HMAKNEY>
<A HENRY MAKNEY>
<G M> 
<P II,111> 
[} [\275. H. MAKNEY TO (SIR WILLIAM STONOR)\] }] 
[\(17 Sept. 1480)\] 
   My Ryghte reverente and my syngler gode Maistire, aftire due
recomendacion, Sire, pleasithe to wete +tat my lady is in gode
hele, blesside be Jhesu, and recomendide unto youe with alle
here herte and mynde, and alle your servantes also, and praythe
daily for your prosperite and wusshuppe, in especiall for your
sone comynge home &c. Syr, your parke gothe welle onewarde in
dikinge and in pale, your husbondrie in like wise, and befe and
moten wex, and the state, with alle odire vitaile, and specially
money. Y pray youe remembre your lente stuffe. Y wulde have be
with youe my selfe or +tis tyme, but y ame so grevyde in my
bakke +tat y may nethe ride ne go. We hire of your grete and
importune chargis latly leyde on youe, whiche causithe alle your
frendis to be y-ryghte full sory therofe: but y beseche Jhesu
contynue youe in honoure as ye have begon, and +tat ye may
furnysshe your selfe in alle abilymentes of werre lyke unto your
ffelowshyppe beynge in rome as ye are in. And also my lady hath
sente here water unto M. Derwothe to undirstonde his conceite,
ande howe he demyth by here water whedir she be in wey of
mending &c. On Soneday nexte afor sente Mathewes day, at
Stonore.
   Your servaunte, H. Makney. 
   To my Ryght Worshipfull Maister.

<Q STO 1480 RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M> 
<P II,111> 
[} [\276. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\October (1480)\] 
<P II,112> 
   Plese it your mastership, after dew recommendacion, I have
ressevyd your letter by my felow Makenay, by whiche letter ye
have commaunded me to deliver hym a bill of an C. li.: and
acordyng therto I have delivered hym the same byll, whiche is
paiable at Feverer next comyng. As for Mr. Colet, I spake with
hym or your letter cam to me, and he gave yow day tyll after a
halow tyde. Syr, as for the mater touchyng your mastership and
Ric. Wynslade, John hys brother and y have sen the billes of the
rekenyng uppon whiche we thynk necessary to have your
mastership, my lady your wif, and Ric. Winslade to mete at
London the viij day after alhalowtyde: acordyng therto John
Wynslade hath sent to his brother to com heder. And Syr, me
semys weldon ye and my lady cam at the same day, and to remembre
you to purvey where my lady shalbe. Y remitt thys to your
wisdom. I understand by your letter thentent of your mastership
touchyng the remayn of my ladies yointur. Syr, I have shewid myn
opynyon to Makenay consernyng that mater, who will show your
mastership myn entent. As for Lestan, your fermor that was at
Horton, hath purveid your monay in substance, it wolbe well don
ye send or bryng your byllis of rekenyng bytwene yow and hym, so
that the verry dette may be clerely understand. Wete ye well I
have dalt quitly with hym in that mater. Syr, y wold be right
glad to se your mastership, for me semys long sens y saw yow,
and so God spede me, who preserve you, and my lady, and all
yours. Writen at London this Thursday with the hand of your
   Page.
   To my master, Syr Wilm. Stonor, knyght for the kynges body. 

<Q STO 1480S WSUTTON>
<A WILLIAM SUTTON>
<G M> 
<P II,115> 
[} [\280. WILLIAM SUTTON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(1480-83)\] 
   Aftur reverent recommendacion. Plesyt yow to have knolege
that my lord Chansler of Oxon desyryt me at his last departyng
from Oxon to remembyr yow of the mater concernyng a pore
gentylwoman callyt Alys Poche, that +ge wold be hyr gud maystur
as +ge have be afore tyme in the way of ryght and consiens: and
if +ge so be he wyll do yow as grete a plesure. And yf hyt lyke
yow to tendur hyr anythyng at my pore request, +ge bynd me to do
for yow and yowres anythyng that lyse in power, with Goddes
grace, who ever kepe yow.
   Will=m= Sutton, preist.
   To mayster Willm. Stoner, knyght. 

<Q STO 1481 WELMES>
<A WALTER ELMES>
<G M>
<P II,116> 
[} [\282. WALTER ELMES TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(3 Jan. 1481)\] 
<P II,117> 
   After all dewe recommendacion, plesyth hit yow to undyrstond
that I merveyle gretely +tat ye send not Thomas Mathewe with the
evydens &c. Thonkyng yow all weyys of youre grete bownteowsnesse
unto me and in especyall of your offer to me grauntyd: wherfor I
am bownd to be your trewe servaunt, and Bedeman whylys I lyve.
Syr, I have remembryd me of your comynycacion of Agas Lovell,
whome, yf hit lykyd yow that I myte have undyr the forme
folowyng, I trust hit shuld be to yow moste proffyte and avayle,
and I and all myn to be your perpetuall Bedemen: yff hit lyke
yow to take me CCCC. li. accordyng to your offre, I shall ffynd
yow suerte to pay yow att viij yeres end your CCCC. li. ageyne,
and CCCCC. marcs for the ward of the seyde Agas, wych wull drawe
nye to the hole stokke of your ij chyldryn, Hewe and Margarete:
and so there stok shall be redy at all tymes, with the on half
in myne hondys, and that othyr half now in your owne hondes, at
your day to do +tat with what ye wull, and thus shall ye be
purveyd of money and your stokk not brokyn. And as for the
contentacion of Harry Colett, yf hit lyke yow to delyver me the
next obligacion of Betson of C. li., I shall at my charge
schevyshe so much and rathyr than fayle the hole: so now lakkyth
non other but suerte in the Yeld hall, wych wull be gevyn apon
such feoffement as ye spake of. Syr, I beseche yow remembre
this, and bete hit ryth well in your mynd. And I trust hit
shalbe your avayle and wurshuppe both to make your power alye,
wych shall ever be bownd to pray for yow, and so yow the profyte
and wurshuppe, and to me and myn a makyng for ever. Syr, yf this
wey lyke yow, I pray yow to send me a byll fro yow to your Almes
hows at Exeter, that I may +te sonner spede mee for Harry
Colettes payment. Furthermore, I beseche yow that +tis sympyll
byll may recommaund me my good lady, your wyffe, and to all
yowrs. And our blessyd lord hold his holy hand over yow and them
with long lyff and grete wurshupp here to endure, Amen. I trust,
thou I be fer fro yow, that +tis lytyll byll [\wull cause
CROSSED OUT\] this cold whedere, and my erand wull make me and
shew me present. Scrybylyd with hond of hym +tat is yowr
servaunt to the extreme of my lytyll power.
   W. Elmes.
   At Andever the Wenesday after Newe Yeres day at vj at Clokk
in +te mornyng.
   To my ryth wurshipfull Master, Syr Wylyam Stonor, knyth for
the kynges Body. 

<Q STO 1481 RGERMYN>
<A RICHARD GERMYN>
<G M> 
<P II,118> 
[} [\284. RICHARD GERMYN TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\3 April, 1481\] 
   Right Onerable and worshipfull Maister, y comaund me unto you
with alle suche servise as y can or may, letinge your
Maistership have enknowliche that Maister John Agecomb is
decessed un Sonday the ffurst day of Averell. Many men have
spoken to me that y shuld labur unto you for Ermyngton. And y
teld hem that ye have geven hit unto Maister Edmunde, and wol
in-proper hit to youre Chapel of Stoner: and so have y aunswerd
them. Moreover, Maister Drew hath wreten a letter unto my lady,
that he wol do help my saide lady of hir sekenesse, and to com
unto hir at his own cost and to geve hir a du attendauns, with
that hit pleased you to geve him this saide benfys. And y have
saide unto him, that his letter is wreten in vayne. And 
<P II,119> 
also y wrote a letter unto youre Maistership, which was
delivered unto Lannoys, skynner, the furst weke in Clene Lente:
y trust ye have him. For as to any man or men, here wolle noon
be goten, as y wrote unto you: savinge ther is oon Vyncent, a
servaunt of my lady is, a gode archer, y suppose he wolle com
unto you: but horse nother harnys hath he noon nor mony. Aray
him ye must at your own cost, yef he com. Jakys shal bringe you
the serteynte of his comynge. And y trust that at M. Elmes
comyng that ye wol assigne whom hit please you to occupy the
ruel of your Almeshous, for y may no longer occupy hit nor can
not; my besenesse wol be suche here after: for y must attende my
ocupacion; for my servant which had the gedinge of my shoppe is
fro me, and with me hath be to longe, for y am the worse for him
y can not tell how moche me seilf. And as to the deth of
Cristoffer Coke, y suppose ye have enknowliche: un who is soule
God take mercy. Y pray your Maistership that this my letter may
comaund me unto my lady, to whom y pray Godde sende hele and
comfort, who have you in his keping. At Exeter in hast the iij
day of Averelle.
   Youre servant Richard Germyn.
   Unto my right Onerable and worshipful Maister, Syr William
Stonore, knyght, at London in the Old bailly. 

<Q STO 1481? RGERMYN>
<A RICHARD GERMYN>
<G M> 
<P II,119> 
[} [\285. RICHARD GERMYN TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\7 April (1481)\] 
   Right Wurshipfull and Onerable Maister, y comaund me unto you
with alle suche servyse as y can or may. Please your maistership
have enknowliche here y sende the copy of a writte, which is
agayn you at the Kinge is sute in Devonshire uppon the (\Deum
claus. extr.\) , which was 
<P II,120>
taken before the Escaetour. As the writte maketh menshion, see
ye the meane to have hit oute of the Chekour, for ye go to a
grete mersement; and more ye had, and y had not sarched
therfore. Also I moved you at my last being at Stonore that my
lord Markas his officer hath distrayned your tenaunt at Clist,
and clemyth a mersshe, the third ffote in alle the said mersshe,
where as he nor noon of his ancetours oute of tyme that no mynde
is never had: and y teld you that y had apoynted with Broun his
auditour, that the seid mersshe shuld ly voyde and not to be
ocupyed in to the tyme that my lorde and ye hadde spoken
together: hit wer wel doon that ye moved my lord of, and to
cause him to write a letter unto Thomas Hexte, his stuard, so
that your londe may be sette. Ther is oon John Wyndbow, which is
my lord is tenant, and holdith moche lond of you, he clemyth
this londe, sayng that hit shuld be longing to his place whiche
he holdith of my lorde, and he is causer of alle this. Ye
comaundid me that y shuld warne him oute of alle suche londes as
he holdith of you: and so have y doon: have ye this mater in
remembrauns. Furthermore y send you worde by Thomas Mathu, that
ther was a almeshous fallen, which shuld be youre geft: y hure
no more synne of. And so stont hit own-gevyn as yet. And now a
nother also, what ye wille shal be doon there in: hit wer wel
doon that ye wrote a letter unto M. Speke ther of. Youre
Maistership gave unto me the next avoydens of oon pore man, and
ye remember, in your stode at Stonore before your cosyn, Walter
Elmys: in lasse then ye wrete unto the seid M. Speke, he will
noon admytte. Moreover, your chauntry prest of Ermyngton is
admytted into the seid your chantre: y made his presentacion,
and my lorde is officers admitted him. And ye be the grettist
man with my lord, and in his consaite: because of your hors
geven and your attendauns unto him at London, that he may do and
al his men ye may have: his servantes reportith of you that ye
be the courtys knyght, that ever thei sawe, where of y am glad.
Also ye wrote a letter unto me that y schuld content M. Speke,
xx. li., wherof y have contented him on this quarter rent of
Cristismas xvj. li. iij. s. iiij. d., as y shal shew you at my
nexte comyng ever passed off my resaite, and as I bede Thomas
Mathu to infurme you. The remenaunt he shal have this quarter of
Ester rentes, and then he is content. And as to your tenaunts in
Cornwale, thei be as trew unto you as y can understond as any
tenauntes that ye have. And as to John Meger, he wille com and
speke with you at suche tyme as y come, and that shal be, by the
grace of God, before Wytsunday, and bringe his Obligacion. And
as to youre wode there, Thomas Haiward wolle geve you xx. li.,
save 
<P II,121> 
ye shal cope hit at youre cost: or els he to cope hit and to pay
you xvij. li. And no peny more wol he geve. Yet ye muste geve
him daies of payment, Mighelmas next comyng x. li., and the next
Mighelmas after the remenaunt. And yef hit leke you that he shal
have hit at this price, ye must wrete your letter to him, so
that he may fille hit before holy Rode day now comyng, or els he
can not fille hit alle this yere. And as for your whete there, y
have made Thomas Haiward to sille hit to your most advaile, of
which ye shal have enknowlich, when y come. Also your place at
Clist is in divers places owver heled: wher ye wol that y shalle
set workmen uppon hit or no, y wold have enknowlich. There after
your comaundement will y do. Richard Wideslade willith me to pay
him this quarter v. li, which he saith hit is youre covenaunt:
and he wolle deliver me your Obligacion of so moche mony: and he
desirith xij. s. iiij. d for his fee at Wulston: wher ye will y
shal pay him or no, y wold have enknowliche fro you, or els he
shal noon have. ij lettres have y wreten unto you synne the
first weke of Clene laynte: and yet had y never answer nor
letter fro you. For goddis sake remember ye to move my lord
Markas ffor this your mersshe, so that he may directe his letter
unto Thomas Hext or unto Speke, for he is my lord is Resever
late made by the deth of Geffrey Bedwelle. No more to you at
this tyme, but alle myghty God be ever youre gode spede. At
Exeter un the vij=e= day of April.
   your Servaunt Richard Germyn.
   To the right wurshipfull and Onerable Maister, Sir William
Stonore, knyghte, be this delivered. 

<Q STO 1481 RSALTER>
<A RICHARD SALTER>
<G M>
<P II,121>
[} [\286. RICHARD SALTER TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\11 April (1481)\] 
   Ryght worshypfull Syr, and my specyall good master, I
commaunde me to yow and where hyt ys so as I am enformyd +tat on
doctor Eggecombe, late resydencyare of Exeter, is decesyd, +te
whyche hadde a benefyce callyd Ermynton in Devonshyre of your
patronage, now beyng 
<P II,122> 
voyde, +te whyche I have harde reporte +ge entende to apropure
or to have lycence to make a chauntre or ij off, to +te whyche I
am enformyd +te bysshoppe woll in no wyse assent: wherfore yff
+ge kan notte opteyn your purpose, butte moste nedys gyff hytte,
yff hytte wold plese yow to have me rememburyd +terunto, I were
ever bounden to be your beddemann, and to pray for yow, as God
knowyth, who ever preserve yow, Amen. Wryton in hast +te xj day
of Aprile. I pray yow geve credens to +te berer heroff.
   Your one to hys power, Richard Salter, doctor.
   To the ryght worshypfull Syr William Stonor, knyght, +tis
byll be delyveryd. 

<Q STO 1481? WELMES>
<A WALTER ELMES>
<G M>
<P II,122> 
[} [\287. WALTER ELMES TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\13 April (1481)\] 
   Aftyr all humble recommendacion. I certyfye yow +tat Wheteley
hath sheywyd to my lord of Gloucester and his Councell your
labor in serchyng dyvers townys. And they marveyle that ye have
sowth them ther, and say that yf ye wold ye kowde goo thydyr wer
they be and fett them. Yf ye have very and trewe word that they
be in Centwary, yf ye so certyfye I thinke ye shalbe excusyd.
And thus is a sure wey for all partys. As for the copye of the
byll, +tat is put ayenst yow, I send you the copye thereof. As
for youre mater of the grete summe, I pray yow to pondre in
youre owne mynde wich of the ij weyys ye lyke best and I shull
be glad to performe your entent. Wherefore I pray yow to wryte
me certeynly wych of thes ij weyys ye wull take, for in this
mater I wull nothyng take apon my sylfe, but wych ye wull have
done shall be done: and that I may have redy wrytyng fro yow at
furthyst by Sonday none, that I may make a ende on Monday, for
then my hors wulbe with me: my howswyffe thouthe never so long
after me, and 
<P II,123> 
lokyth her tyme every day: wherefore I wull no longer tary than
Monday. As for Bradbury wull delyver yow in on yere for all v
yeres in stuffe, yf ye nede, and I kan have no more money of
them till ther wrytyng be made uppe: and so I kan not pay Master
Powle. And yf ye wull that Bradbury have hit not, I pray yow
send all them iij a letter, howe ye fere to dele with them for
your jeoparde and theres for fere of +te kyng: wych shall be a
excuse for me also. They wull be loth to leve the money I fere
me, now they have yt. And yf ye dele not with them, ye must be
her in hast to be suerte with that othyr persones and discharge
thos othyrs or ye have +te money. I remytte all to your wysdome,
and +tat I may sone have word fro yow. John Cheynye is owt a
hawkyng, as sone as he comyth home I shall delyver yowr letter.
The Kyng purposyth to be at W[{ynd{]sore. In hast as I hope my
lady is in good hele, and all yours. No more to yow at this
tyme, but almyty Jesu presene [{yow{] . At London +t=e= xiij day
of Apryll in hast.
   Yours to my lytyll powere W. Elmes.
   I have delyvered my Lord Chaunceler the money: but I kanne
have no letter of hym. He is so bysye with the Kyng. He would
have sene my lorde prevy seale letter fayne afore.
   To my worshipffyll Master Sir W. Stonore, knyth for the Kyngs
body. 

<Q STO 1481? WELMES>
<A WALTER ELMES>
<G M>
<P II,123> 
[} [\288. WALTER ELMES TO (SIR WILLIAM STONOR)\] }] 
[\(16 April, 1481)\] 
   After all humble recommendacion &c. I have spokyn with John
Harecort, and he sweryth he wull do for yow, and purposyth to
sytt in the Ester wyke, but he wuld fayne have Stepenhyth
endityd: but +tat shuld not help your mayne. Sir W. Norreys wull
do for yow, and sey whatt he kanne. Ye must be here fore the
newe Reconisaunce. I wrote to yow +tat Bradbury wull delyvere
your gayne in stuffe and ware, 
<P II,124> 
but not in money. I purpose to be homwarde to morowe, yf I may,
and shall do and make all thynges suere as by woode advyse kan
be made or I goo. If ye have any certeynte of your men I wuld
advyse yow to come shewe hit, for my lord of Gloucester, my lord
Chamberleyne be gon, and now be her your frendys. No more to
yow, but Jhesu preserve yow. At London the morowe after Palme
Sonday. I purpose to come home bye Wynsore and fett your money.
   Your servaunt W. Elmes.
[\NO ENDORSEMENT.\] 

<Q STO 1481 RGERMYN>
<A RICHARD GERMYN>
<G M> 
<P II,124> 
[} [\289. RICHARD GERMYN TO DAME AGNES STONOR\] }] 
[\1 May (1481)\] 
   Right Worshipfull and Reverent Madam, I commaund me unto you
with alle suche servyse as y can or may. Hit is so that oon of
youre poremen is decessed, whiche is Pryns. And ye remember ye
graunted syr John Yotte the next avoidens at your departing. He
praiyth you to remember hym, that he might have these hous,
which was Pryns is hous, as ever he may hereafter do at your
comaundment or desire, as ye knew right well he hath doon for
you herebefore. And now his trust is to be remembred at this
tyme according to your promyse at hit [\SIC\] last speking with
you. And also my Maister, your husbond that was, granted oon to
the Sudden, and another the Old Reynold, which have called upon
me to [{be{] admytted in to this said hous: and y have aunswerd
them alle that y wolle admitte noon in to the tyme that my
Maister and ye send me youre comaundment wham I shalle admitte
in. Hit is youres, ye may geve it to wham hit pleasith you.
Moreover, I hertly pray you, as ever y shal ow you my servyse,
to remember my letter which y wrote unto you by Jakys, which oon
mater was your
<P II,125> 
corne, and the other mater was that my Maister and ye shuld send
a man to reseve this Ester Rent of your londes of your Almeshous
for the payment of youre poremen and priest, and the geding
therof. For I may no longer ocupy hit, nor noght wolle. I must
attend my own besenesse, as I wrote unto youre ladiship: he that
was my man is fro me, and by any thinge that y know y am xx=ti=
li. the worse for him. For which cause y pray you remember ye my
lost, and not to awe me your hevy ladiship, as my trust is y
have not deserved. And y shal induce him that shal ocupy the
rule and gedinge of your almshous so that he shal gede hit beter
than ever y ded. And let him com a down so that he may be at
Exeter iiij wekes uppon this Ester: and to gether uppe the rent
to this hous belonging. And y shal shew hym alle youre londes,
so that ye shal know your londes fro myn, by the grace of Jhesu:
and preserve me seilf a tru man for alle the report that is made
of me unto my Maister, to wham y pray you to comaund me. And of
this my letter and of your welfare y wold desire to have sume
knowlich: and how ye do in your fesik. And yef ther be any
servyse that ye wolle comaund me to do here in your absens or
els where, ye shal alway fynde me a redy to do your comaundment,
as wel as though y didde ocupy this office under you. Remember
ye wel, ye must hastly to admitte a poreman in Pryns is hous
withoute any delay, wham hit pleasith you: and to assigne him
that shall be Resever to pay this next payment, which wol be
within this iij wekes: for y wol pay no mo paymentes after
these, which is the day of my letter wretinge, the ffurst day of
May. And y wold that hit plesed my Maister and you to let Thomas
Mathu be Resever of the Almeshous. And Jhesu have you in his
keping and send you as gode hele as y wold have my seilf.
   Your man Ric. Ger[{myn{] .
   To my lady Stonor in hast be this delivered. 

<Q STO 1481 TMOLEYNS>
<A THOMAS MOLEYNS>
<G M> 
<P II,126> 
[} [\291. THOMAS MOLEYNS TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 20 June, 1481)\] 
   Right worshipfull Master, I recommaund me unto your
mastership: please it you to understond that now in the
begynnyng of this terme one John Hyll, Squyer, suyth a (\Quare
impedit\) ayenst you in Devonshire, supposyng by his writ that
ye desturbe and let hym to present his clerke to the free
Chauntry of Ermyngton, which longyth to his presentacion, as he
supposith by hys wryt: I know nether your title nether his, I
pray you to send me a bill of the mater of your title therto, if
ye have title, that your counseill may know it, or nede be to
plede. I shall do alle that lith in me to do for your
mastership, by the 
<P II,127> 
grace of God, who gyf your mastership as well to fare as your
hert can thynke, Amen. By your servaunt to my symple power 
   Th. Moleyns.
   Wretyn at London on Wednesday next before Midsomerday.
   To my right worshipfull master, Sir William Stonore, knyghte.

<Q STO 1481? JYAXLEE>
<A JOHN YAXLEE>
<G M>
<P II,127> 
[} [\292. JOHN YAXLEE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 8 July, 1481)\] 
   Ryght reverent and worshipfull Sere, I recomaund me to +gou
&c. Sere, my Mastres Harlston recomaundyth here to +gou: and I
am sure she wilbe glad iff I tell here of +gour prosperous
welfare, whan I come home: for in good feyth, sere, she was
verry ffull off thought and ferd lest +ge had ben sore seke or
gretly diseasid, be cause she cowd not here from +gour good
Mastership many a day. Wherfor she desired me feythfully +tat I
shuld inquere of your welfare, of +te whech I have herd at
London +te certente, thankyd be Jhesu, ho have +gour seid
worshipful mastership in kepyng. Wreten at London, +te mornyne
next after Seint Thomas Day with +te rude hand of +gour
fey+tefull servaunt, hos name is John Yaxlee.
   To my ryght reveren[{t and{] worshipful master Sere Willm.
Stoner, in hast delyvered. 

<Q STO 1481 WSTONOR>
<A WILLIAM STONOR>
<G M> 
<P II,131> 
[} [\296. SIR WILLIAM STONOR TO HARRY DOGETT\] }] 
[\23 Dec. 1481\] 
   My old frynd, I recommaund me unto you. Syr, I have resseyvyd
a bylle fro my cosyn Elmes, wyche cam fro you, so my seyd cosyn
seth, he vyll sele to the doctor, and wyllyth me to make yov a
suffycient varant for the x. li. Syr, by this bylle, vryt with
my own hand on Crist[{mas{] Eve ys Eve (\Anno regni regis\) E.
iiij=ti= xxj=o=, I vylle at the nexte reseyte by my cosyn Elmes
ye be content, and this wryt with my ovne hand shalbe his
sufficient dyscharge, he so contenteyng yov the sume of x. li.
My trust ys I shalle have thys cope ayen thys tyde. Jhesu
preserve yov your lond [\?\] at Stonore.
   Will=m= Stonore K. 
   To my trusty frynd Harry Dog[{ett{] in hast.

<Q STO 1481 JSHYNNER>
<A JOHN SHYNNER>
<G M>
<P II,133> 
[} [\299. JOHN SHYNNER TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(c. 1481)\] 
   Most worchepfull and reveryend Mayster, I recummend me onto
yowr reverynd Maisterchep also lowly as I can hoder may: wyllyng
yowr Maysterchep to have knowleche +tat syr Wylyam Sandys ys
gretely dysplesyd with me, and Jaye do lesayd maner also, as for
a grehowde +tat I scholde send onto yowr maysterchep as they
say: +te weche I know not what coler +tis grehowd ys, noder no
seche I send to yow, neyder was consente +ter to: werefor I
beseche yowr maysterchep to wrythe onto Syr Wiliam Sandys as for
myne a skese, and to speke to Jaye at Londun, wen, ye methe with
hym, as my treste ys on yowr Maysterchep, and as I schall and am
yowr preste to praye to God for yow and yowrys, ho have yow and
yowrs in hys kepyng ever, Amen
   your preste Syr John Shynner.
   To my ry+gth worchepfull and reverynd Mayster Syr Wiliam
Stonor, yn hast.

<Q STO 1481? JSHYNNER>
<A JOHN SHYNNER>
<G M>
<P II,134> 
[} [\300. JOHN SHYNNER TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1481)\] 
   Ry+gth reverent and worcheppell Mayster, I recommende me on
to yowr Maysterchepp allso hertely as I can and may: prayeng
yowr Maysterchepp to gete me a subpena for John Rowse, apon +tat
he was ynfefyet yn treste to follfyll my fader ys wyll, and John
Leghe and Water Torryng, +te weche John Leghe and Water Torryng
be +te partyd of +tis worll, and so John Rowse is alyve, and y
deser he scholde folfyll my fader ys wyll. And yn +te reverans
of God laboryd ye to be scherve: for hyt ys a presentabell
offise, +te worcheppefollyst yn +te scher have ben schervys and
yet theye hope to be: and Wylyam Fowell sayde to me +tat Syr
Thomas Selynger hopyt to be scherve +tis yer: and Wylyam Fowell
sayd hyt wer all so convenyant and presentabell to yow as to
hym, and sayd hyt well be worth to yow a C. nobelys abow all
costys and awayll mene hoder man onder yow: and yef ye be
scherve I beseche yow that John Tollocke may be creyer of +te
schere, and he shall plese yow also largely as heny hoder
schall, +te weche John Tollocke ys my soster sone. And I have
send on to yowr Maysterchepp for my wrethe of subpena by the
berer of thys byll ij. (^s.^) vj. d. And yet 
<P II,135> 
yn +te reverens of God remembret yowr sylve to labor to be
scherve: for hyt well gete yow a quayntens, and hyt ys beter to
goveryn then to be goveryed. No mor on to yowr Maysterchepp at
+tis tyme, but Jhesu preserve yow ever. Amen. I-wrethen at
Modbere on Synt Luke ys yeve.
   By your aune Syr John Schynner, parson of Penyton.
   To my Rygth reverend Mayster and pattron, Syr Wiliam Stonor,
knygh. 

<Q STO 1481? JSHYNNER>
<A JOHN SHYNNER>
<G M>
<P II,135> 
[} [\301. JOHN SHYNNER TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1481)\] 
   Ry+gth reveryend Mayster, I recummende me to yowr Maysterchep
&c. I have ben with my Maysteres, yowr Moder, and ther I schall
never come mor by +te grace of God, for I was falsse varlet,
theffe, and her traytour, and God yove me grace +tat I never
methe with her more, ffor I have the namys of yowr bredren and
sosteren. As ffor her armys I have hyt not, bot +te lord Mese
woll bryng ham to yow &c. Also, rememberyt to wrythe to Mayster
Wageth as for Flethe and Forde to be Tedyngman and sewtey to
yowr cerche of Ermeton. Also, I wolde ye wolde to sewe to be
scherve of owr scher, for me semyt hyt wolde be presentabell and
to gethe a quayntans, love, and drede withyn +tis scher, and
rememberyt how mene worchepfull men have be schervys of +tat
scher, bothe of yowr contre and of +tis. And yef yowr
Maysterchep have hyt I wolde beseche yow to have a offyce as for
a kynnysman of myne to be cryer of +te scher &c.
   By your aune Syr John Shynner.
   To my ry+gth reveryend and specyall mayster, Syr Wiliam
Stonor, kny+gth, yn haste. 

<Q STO 1481? PCAVERSHAM>
<A PETER CAVERSHAM>
<G M>
<P II,136> 
[} [\302. PETER CAVERSHAM, ABBOT OF NUTLEY, TO SIR WILLIAM
STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 1480-81)\] 
   Worsypull Syr, y recomend me unto yowe, and y pray yowe y
my+gt byn recomendyd to my lady yowr wyfe as a contreyman nowe
of hurs nat to her kowyng, but with +te grace of God and yowr
gentylnes y schall byn &c. As to +te intent of +tis byll, +tis
hyt ys: ther one Paddenall of Crendon, whom +ge kowe well and
longyng unto +gowe, and trobull me sore in my myndys of many
dyverse matres, +te wych ar so long to writ unto yow and then
hit wulde wery a man or he had don, and in specyall such a
sympull writer as y am &c: prayng yowe, as my synguler trust is
in yowe, and in tyme schert I schull reward yowe, +tat such
commynantes as y made with yowe of +te ferme of Crendon my+gt
byn performyd: for +tis sympull man, +te wych y release hit to,
whom +ge had promysyd me fryst, at yowr request, bydyth by no
promysse +tat he made to us, but trobull me: prayng of your
gentyllnes to take none displesur thoy y trobull hym acordyng to
+te lawe; for, saffe yowr reverans, he ys untrewe, for he
sclaunders me +tat Thomas Salman schuld seye +tat y had more
stondyd out j acre of +te kynges ground, the wych +te other
never seyd nother never cowde make profe +terof: y wuld naut he
my+gt for an hondur pond: +tis my+gt every worsypull man byn
sclaunder: as my trust, send me word howe +tat +ge wyll deale on
+tis mater, for in gode soth saffe for yower sake he schuld
havyn kowyng +terof ar +tis: as +ge thynke hit is gode to yowe
remember me, and I schall yowe, as my most trust. At Nott. by
Syr Peter abbot of +te same.
   Unto my most gode specyall frend, Syr William Stonor, in
hast. 

<Q STO 1482? TBANKE>
<A THOMAS BANKE>
<G M> 
<P II,137> 
[} [\303. THOMAS BANKE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\16 January (1482)\] 
   Pleasyd +gour maistyrshyp to understond +tat I hayff beyn
with doctour Sutton, our commyssare, and I dyd shew to hym howe
+goure maistyrshyp boy+th was and ys dysposyd to +te universite,
as in fyndyng and relevyng off divers scolars to +te same and
also by relevyng off many o+ter suche as cummys to +gour
maistyrshyp at divers tymes in +te +gere, lyke as Mr. Eadmunde,
Mr. Flynte, Mr. Kyckall, and I with o+ter moye dyd layte; off
whome I desyryd +te commyssare to inquire +gour worshypfull and
gentyll behave+gour to tham and to iche on off tham, because I
wolde he sulde gyff more credens to myn informacyon. Also, syr,
I was with my lord Edwarde and maistyr Stanley, and informyd
tham in lyke wyse, and dyd shew boyth to my lorde Edwarde, to
maistyr Stanley, and to maistyr commyssare, +te delyng and +te
behave+gour off certan 
<P II,138> 
scolars a+ganes +gour maistyrshyp and +gour servands, specyaly
when +tai cume to +te universite for suche necessytes as +ge
hayff to doo +ter: and +ten my lord Edwarde and Mr. Stanley
desyryd +te commyssare at +ter instanse to see an remedy, suche
as +gour servandes myght boyth cume and goo to or from +te
universite in sayffe garde off +ter bodes: and +te commyssare
seyd he wolde doo as myche as he myght by +te vertu off hys
offece to provyde an remedy: nott withstondyng all thys, me
semys +te moste suerte ys +gour awn wey to send for tham by
privey selys. Cadwey ys benefysyd in Oxfurte: he may nott flee.
Syr, I sayd to +te comyssare +tat +ge wold send for tham by
privey seles, bod yff +te universite dyd see an remedy: and +te
commyssare sayd, yff +ge dyd so he culd nott blame +ge, in so
myche as +tei wylnot be reulyd. No more, save I besyche Jhesu
preseryff +go and +gores evermore, Amen. Frome Oxfurth +te xvj
day off Januer.
   +gour servand and bedman Thomas Banke.
   Syr, Maistyr Stanley, eftyr all +te comunycacyon before
rehersyd, dyd send for Cadwey to cume to hym: for Cadwey is
grete with hym: and +ter maystyr Stanley declaryd howe ney off
kyn my laydy +gour wyff and he stande, and desyryd hym as he
wolde hayffe hys gude Maistyrshyp to owe hys luffe and favour to
+gour servandes in Oxfurth or owte off Oxfurth wharsoever +tei
dyd mete: for Maistyr Stanley sayd +tat he moste nedes take
+gour parte in all ryght: and so sayd my lorde Edwarde also,
when we dyd comon firste off +te mater: and so Cadwey hays
promysyd to Maistyr Stanley +tat he wyll ne+ter doo ne sey
a+ganes +gour servandes, bod ra+ter to helpe to convey tham yff
anyman wolde doo or sey a+ganes tham: bod +tis ys no suerte to
+gour servandes for o+ter off hys cuntremen. Warfor, me semes
+gour awn wey ys beste, to send for tham, or to cause +te kyng
to wryte to +te universite for an remedy as +ge thynke beste &c.
   To hys worshypfull Maistyr Syr Wylliam Stonor, knyght, be
+tis delyveryd. 

<Q STO 1482 HMAKNEY>
<A HENRY MAKNEY>
<G M> 
<P II,138> 
[} [\304. HENRY MAKNEY TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(? 29 Jan. 1482)\] 
<P II,139> 
   My ryghte worshipful Maistire, y recomand me to youe &c. Syr,
the prioure of Frideswide of Oxford is collector of the dymys,
he hathe sen to Pirton and hathe suspendide +te cherche for the
dymys, and also he suspendide olde Bayly, whiche hath parcelle
of +te tythis in Pirton undire youe. Wherfor ye moste se a
remedy that +te parishens may be servyde and the dymys payde. Y
hire +tat the dymys ben more +ten xl. s., whiche is unpayd. Also
here is on Willm. Clerke of Nustelynge, whiche is grevously
vexide and trowblide by Thomas Hardgrave for suche servise as he
dide to Edmunde Ramsey in youre behalfe, wen +te furste
possession was take +ter; and also when ye were +ter ye made
hyme brynge the tenantis to Rumsey to speke with youe; for
whiche causis he dare not abide in his house for drede of
arestinge by write or for suerte of the pease: wherfore the seid
Clerke besechithe your gode Maistershippe to lete make a cerche
if +ter be any accion conceveide ayenste hyme by Hardgrave, and
+tat he my+gte have a (\supersedeas\) fro the Chancery, whiche
shulde cause odire men to be glade to do youe servise in +tat
contre, if ye kepe this man harmeles &c. Item youre husbondrie
is note welle gydide: ye have iiij or v hynys and but on plowe
goynge, where as +ge my+gte have ij plows. Y have spoke to +te
bayly to have fewere servantes or a nodire plowe goynge: but he
wulde note be rewlide by me, but take his owne wey, whiche
wulnote be moste for your profite, as y trowe. Item your
childern be note at Oxford by cause of horse, money and men: for
your servantes dare note come in Oxford. At Stonore, the Tuysday
nexte afore Candelmasday,
   Your servant H. Makney.
   To my Ryghte reverente Maister, Syr Willm. Stonor. 

<Q STO 1482? RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M>
<P II,141> 
[} [\309. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(1482)\] 
   In as humble wise as y can y recommaunde me to yowr good
mastership, as he that thenkys a long seson sens y saw your
mastership: I ensure [\?\] the same: y am as glad for the good
spede of my lady and 
<P II,142> 
that she is with chylld, as y am of any woman levyng. Wold God
it wold plese you to com to your Horton when terme is don: y
will geve yow attendance: ther is ther an punchon or tweyn of
wyne abydyng your mastership: y hope suche as woll plese yow.
Syr, y am desyrid to write to your mastership for your old
servant and my felow, James Boteller, that it wold lyke yow to
put suche attemtes and maters as is ayenst hym, and som
direccion so that he by the mene of yowr mastership may leve in
quiete and rest: and y am sure he woll do you service to the
uttermost of his power to put his pore lif in juperde. Syr, y am
sory to encumbre your good mastership with this simple mater,
but at lest ye may do a speciall dede of almes and deserve thank
of almyghty God, who ever preserve yow and all youres for my
synguler comfort. Writen at London this Saterday in the morning
with the hand of your servant
   Ric. Page.
   As for news y have told this berrer to enforme yow. I fere me
he cannot well shew them to your mastership.
   To my master, Syr Willm. Stonor, knight for the Kynges body
be this delivered. 

<Q STO 1482? RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M> 
<P II,142> 
[} [\310. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(1482)\] 
   Plese it your mastership, y have resseyvyd your letter in
whiche ye commaunde me to speke to my lord prince councell
touchyng bran at [\?\] 
<P II,143> 
mater. Syr, me semys, savyng your correccion, it were not best
to do so, for y suppose they know nothing of it, and me semys it
were folie to shew the mater to thaym and to let thaym have
understondyng theroff. Also trew it is my lord prince hath a
writ of ravyshment of his ward Barantyne ayenst you and my lady
Botiller. I have spoken with my lord prince Attornay and shewid
hym the mater: so uppon de[{w{] [\?\] prove made of myne
informacion, whyche is that he was maried in his fadris life as
your mastership wrote on to me, the mater shall and must take a
good end. And so it is respited tyl the next terme ye com yor
self. Syr, as for the xij=c= li., whiche Bettson awis you, if he
be disposid to content you, and welnot dele with your stok, me
semys it makys litell force so he woll make you paiement in
monay. For y wold not ye were incombrid with waris, at wollnot
be your profitt, so it semys me. I remitt this to your
mastership. I pray Jhesu save my lady is fare bely. I pray God
send hir good tyme and good deliveraunce. Plese it your
mastership this rude byll may recommaunde me to hir good
ladyship. And this I make and send at this seson. I pray god
send you your hartes desire. Writen with the fest at London this
thursday +tat of
   Your Page.
   This byll be delivered to Master Syr Willm. Stonor, knygth to
the Kinges body. 

<Q STO 1482 TMOLEYNS>
<A THOMAS MOLEYNS>
<G M> 
<P II,143> 
[} [\311. T. MOLEYNS TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(1482)\] 
   Right worshipful Master, I Recommaund me unto your
Mastership, letyng your mastershipe understond that Page and I
have spoken with my lord Prynce Counsell for the accion ageyn
you and my lady Barantyne; and that mater shall be contynued til
the next terme, upon communycacion betwen them and you and your
Counsell. I know no mo materes ageyn you. Your man tellyd me
that ye were in doute of a nother sute in my lord Prynce is
name. I have serched therfor, but certeynly ther 
<P II,144> 
is noon. I have resceyvyd v.s. by your servaunt. And Jhesu
preserve you. Amen. Wrytyn in hast. By your servaunt T. Moleyns.

<Q STO 1482? SSTALLWORTH>
<A SIMON STALLWORTH>
<G M>
<P II,144> 
[} [\312. SIMON STALLWORTH TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\1 May (1482 ?)\] 
   Worchypfull Syr, with dewe recomendacions and acordyng I
recommend me unto you, prayng you to have me excusyd of my
commyng: for withowt dowt I hadde purposyd to have bene with you
+tis nyght. A kynsman of myne and felowe of Mertyne college, I
trust to God schall be +te proctor, and hathe send for me in
suche wysse as withowte I be with hym +tis night he is lykley to
be distrenyd, suche labor ther is ageyne hym: I trust he shall
do you servyce herafter. Syr, also accordyng to your plesur I
send for Wiliam Walche to +te intent to have dronkyn wyth hym,
and he wass not in Thame. My lord send me wrytyng +tat he hadde
abyld Christofore Holand in +tat rowmythe by +te labor of you, I
am content, and ye for to have +te delyng betwyx W. Walche and
hym. Notwithstandyng my lorde send me word +tat he hadde takyne
hym a byll of his awne hand. I askyd Christofor, but I cowthe
nott se it. Syr, my lord wyld +tat Christofor shold answer hym
at thys tyme for hys payment, and +tat mony +tat W. Walche hathe
receyvyd Christofor to have it. As for +te rentalls and o+ter
evydence hadde by Wylyam Walche, +ge kanne have +te delyveraunce
of +tem to Christofore: for my lord profytt better +ten I wer
with you: and in +te balywyke of Dorchester my lord send me word
+tat +ge hade spok to hym +ter for, and he wyll contynue it to
he, +ge and I spek to gydyr +ter inne: I trust +ge schalbe
plesyde. And wher ye wyld me to be frend to Christofore Holand,
I schalbe redy to fullfyll +tat commaundement. Syr, also I
undyrstand +tat my lord wyld +tat a copy of +te vicaries land in
Dorchester schold be hadde to +te beholve of Rychard Idley, and
+te 
<P II,145> 
fyne reservyde to you and me: so I have wrytyng: it wer ryght
wel done an end to be hadd in +tis mater: it is lytyll valewe
and mykyll mony spend +terinne. I schal schewe +te presedent of
iij. li. vj. s. viij. d. fyne in +te same land. On Thorsday I
most be at Thame Abby, and so depart to Bukden: yf ye schall
please any thyng +tat I may do by +tat tyme or after I schalbe
redy. I beseke ye also +tat I may have your mynd and speke with
Christofore Holand and [\SIC\] Thame on Thorsday: for +ten I
must send to my lord of theys thynges and other, howe +tat I doo
in thys countre and in theys maters. I ame ryght sory +tat I may
not speke with you or ye departe: but I trust to Jhesu to avate
on you at Nottyngham with my servyce: who ever have you in hys
blyssyd kepeng. At Dorchester in gret hast +te fyrst day of May
by +te hand of youre servant
   Simon Stallworthe.
   To the Ryght worchypfull and my god maister Syr Wylyam
Stonore, knyght for +te body, be thys delyverde in godly haste
&c. 

<Q STO 1482 HUNTON>
<A HUGH UNTON>
<G M>
<P II,145> 
[} [\313. HUGH UNTON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(11 May, 1482)\] 
<P II,146> 
   Right worshipfull Maister, I recommaunde me unto you. Syr, as
for yowr gret mater afore my lord Bryan the waraunt is in; I
have geten hit in. Syr, Worthe is here nowe and the Justices
have graunt him his reddicion; bot your counsell sayen hit is no
gret hurt for you, for and he enter by his awne auctorite ye may
put him owte and take ye the profetes of the land. And gif he
enter by auctorite of the Sheref by a writ, is called (\habere
facias sesinam\) , ye most suffer the Sherefs Officers to enter
by vertu of the writ or waraunt, and as sone as thai ben gone
enter ye ageyn and take the profetez. Syr, as for all your other
accions I shall take as gud hede +terto as I can for every
ayeynest the terme And sum fals pacche will be don, the which
shal not be to my power, with goddes grace. Syr, ther is an
accion nowe newe taken ayeynest you in Hampshire at the sute of
on Agnes Foster, wydowe; but is trespas. Syr, as for wyne I have
sent you by John Somer, to be deliveret to John Baker a Henley,
ij hogges hedes of Claret wyne, a hogges hed of red wyne, a
hogges hede of white wyne. And as for spices I spake to Maister
Russh; hee [\SIC\] thai loke for a gale comys nowe in, as he
sais and then he will by be gret, and then ye shall have with
him as moche as ye will: bot he will lay down now no money for
noon. And as for candell, we can have non such as ye send fore,
as Taylboys can tell your Maistership. And as for fyssh, I can
none by withoute money. And rysshes and sope I have send you by
John Somers barge, the which wilbe at Henley opon Sonday or
Monday at the forthest. Syr, this day messyngers go into every
shire with commissions and writtes of proclamacions, that every
man that hase endented to go with the Kyng to be redy with in
xiiij dayes. Syr, the Kyng departes northewardes opon Twesday in
Whitsonday weke. And therefore Maister Russh counseles you in
any wise ye to be here Monday all day to labour to my lord
Markas as for your mater anendes the Qwene and divers other
causes, the which he will enfourme you of at your comyng. And 
<P II,147> 
allmighty Jhesu have you in kepyng. Writen this Saterday. And as
for the joyner your werk wilnot be redy bot ayeynest midsomer.
   Your owne servaunt H. Unton.
   To my worshipful Maister Syr William Stonor, knyght for +te
body. 

<Q STO 1482 WSTONOR>
<A WILLIAM STONOR>
<G M> 
<P II,148> 
[} [\315. SIR WILLIAM STONOR TO JOHN ABREY\] }] 
[\23 May, 1482\] 
   Abrey, I pray yov se the demys content; also Belle of
Schyrburne hath byn with me, and Jon Baker: so I hollde me
content to reseyve ix markes of Baker for Belle for the tyth of
soche as he nov oft to pay. At Stonore, the Thursday nexte a
fore Whytsunday, A=no= xxij=o=.
   Wyllm. Stonore, K. 

<Q STO 1482? RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M>
<P II,152> 
[} [\321. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\23 August (1482)\] 
   I recommaunde me to your mastership in my best maner:
besekyng of the same I may be recommaundid to my lady, your wif,
as he that is very glad of her good spede: I pray Jhesu save
hir, and send hir good lif and long. Plese it yow to understond
that Frere Hugh, chaunter prest of Horton, woll no longe occupie
the Chaunterie ther: wherfor, syr, like it your mastership to
write unto the master of Cobham, whos name is Doctor Underwode,
to put in to the same Chaunterie Syr Robert Tybe, whiche is an
honest prest and good, and a clene levyng man: y ensure yow he
wolbe a sure bedeman to yowr mastership, and do yow as good
service as woll any prest in Kent to his power. As for newes,
the brynger can informe your mastership, to whom like it you to
geve credens. I pray God save you and all yours. Writen at
London on seint Bartholomew ys yeve with the hond of your
servant.
   Ric. Page.
   To my master, Syr willm. Stonor, knyght for the Kynges body,
be thys delivered. 

<Q STO 1482? RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M> 
<P II,152> 
[} [\322. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\(1482)\] 
   In as humble wise as y can I recommaunde me to your good
mastership. Syr, y have spoken with Master Lewes: I can not
desire hym to be more courtais ne more gentyll towardes your
mastership then he is 
<P II,153> 
in every behalve. Wherfor your mastership must remembre the
favourable delyng and alliance bytwene yow: he woll not in no
maner wise lese your favour, for he thenkygh it to hym right a
singuler tresor: and also y am right well assurid your
mastership woll not hurt hym, ne lese his ffavour: hit were not
to doo, savyng yourself and your dewte, whiche he is, and I dar
say wolbe, as glad to perform [{every{]ythyng accord[{yng to{]
your [{p{]lesyr and reson, as [{any{] gentilman in Kent, or any
other man levyng. I[{ ... n{]o man speke better of your
mastership then he spekys, and that in every point. [{Y write{]
under correccion of your mastership, yet this [{must{] be
consideryd in a ... [{gen{]tilman, and that your mastership
myght, if it [{plese y{]ow, dele more favourably [{with{] hym
for this maner of is delyng to come ... in displesyr, which God
defe[{nd. And Syr{] , this me semys it wer well don ... [{I
have{] spake with John Ford to be your fermor at Horton, y have
confortyd hym ther[{in{] , and he is for yow. I pray God save
you, and my lady, and my yonge master your son for my grete
comfort. Writen at your Horton this . . . with the hand of your
servaunt.
   Ric. Page.
   To my good master, Syr Willm. Stonor, knyght for the Kynges
body. 

<Q STO 1483? RPAGE>
<A RICHARD PAGE>
<G M> 
<P II,157> 
[} [\327. RICHARD PAGE TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\12 March (1483)\] 
   I recommaunde to your maystership. Syr, as this day I have
ress. your letter by my fellow Tailbois, M=r=. Lewes beyng with
me at diner in my pore hous: I understand well theffecte of your
writyng. Syr, if it like your mastership to call to remembraunce
he ys your feffe of the same land, by force wherof he may
justefie the takyng away of the cornys, and if he be lettyd he
may take an accion ayenst thaym that let hit, notwithstandyng
men woll indevor thaym to do you service and plesyr as fer as
they may. Also he may have a (\replegiar\) , and so have
deliveraunce: ther can no man say nay, but if he do contrarie
the law. Syr, if it plese your mastership, he woll be bounde to
abide the rule of your counsell, suche as he hath writen to your
mastership off. And under correccion, me semys, it wer better to
take that way, the premisses wele-considerid, than otherwise.
Like it yow to yeve credens to the berer, to whom I have shewd
my conseit in this mater. From your Horton, on seint Gregori is
day, with the hond off
   Your servaunt Ric. Page.
   To my master Sir William Stonor, knyght. . . .

<Q STO 1483 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M> 
<P II,159> 
[} [\329. EDWARD PLOMPTON TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\23 May 1483\] 
   Right honorable and synguler good maister, the most humble
and due recommendacion had: pleaseth your maistershipp to
remembre your graunt by my lord of Saint Johns of your ferme of
Warpisgrowe, like as apperith by your byll by my said lord
asseignet: now is tyme for your maistershipp to mowe your said
graunt. I wold advyse you incontynent to send to Th. Dawy,
steward of Saint Johns at London, and sone uppon to entre in to
the said ferme, observyng your said graunt accordyng to the
lawe: and my servyce ever at your commaundement, as knawith
Jhesu, who your good maistershipp preserve. Writtyn in hast at
Wycomb the xxiij day of May, 1483.
   Your servant Ed. Plompton
   Secretary to my lord of Saint John.
   To the right honorable and my synguler Maister, Sir Willm.
Stoner knyght. 

<Q STO 1483 SSTALLWORTH>
<A SIMON STALLWORTH>
<G M>
<P II,159> 
[} [\330. SIMON STALLWORTH TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\9 June 1483\] 
   Master Stoner, after dew recommendacons, I recommend me to
youe. As for tydyngs seyns I wrote to yove we her noun newe. +te
Quene kepys stylle Westm., my lord of +Gorke, my lord of
Salysbury with othyr mo wyche wyll nott departe as +gytt. Wher
so evyr kanne be founde any godyse of my lorde Markues it is
+tayne. +Te Priore of 
<P II,160> 
Westm. wasse and +gytt is in a gret trobyll for certeyne godys
delyverd to hyme by my lord Markques. My lord Protector, my lord
of Bukyngham with all othyr lordys, as well temporale as
spirituale, were at Westm. in +te councel chambre from x to ij,
butt +ter wass none +tat spake with +te Qwene. +Ter is gret
besyness ageyns +te coronacion, wyche schalbe +tis day fortnyght
as we say. When I trust +ge wylbe at London, and +ten schall +ge
knove all +te world. +Te Kyng is at +te towre. My lady of
Glocestre come to London on thorsday last. Also my lord
commendys hyme to yove, and gave me in commaundement to wryte to
you, and prayes you to be god Master to Edward Jhonson of Thame.
He wass with my lord, and sued to be made a denyson for fer of
+te payment of +tis subsedy: and my lord send to Jeves +te
clerke of +te corone and sawe +te commissione and schewyde to
hyme +tat he schold pay butt vj s. viij d. for hymeself: and so
wer he better to do +ten to be mayde denyson, wyche wold coste
hym +te thyrd parte of his goods. And as for suche as have
trobyld with in +te lordchype of Thame my lord wylbe advysyd by
you at your commyng for +te reformacion, yf +ge take note or +ge
come: for he thynkes +tat +tei schalbe punyshed in examplee of
othyr. And Jhesu preserve yove. In haste from London by +te
handys of your servande, +te ix day of June.
   Simon Stallworthe.
   To the ryht honorabille Sir William Stoner, knyghte. 

<Q STO 1483 FLOVELL>
<A FRANCIS LOVELL> 
<G M>
<P II,162> 
[} [\333. FRANCIS, VISCOUNT LOVELL TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR\] }] 
[\11 October, 1483\] 
<P II,163> 
   Cosyn Stoner, y commawnde me to youe as hartely as y cane:
for as myche as hit plesyth +te Kynges grace to have warnyd youe
and all other to attende upon his grace, and your compeny +tat
ye wolde come in my conysans and my compeny to come with you:
and I ame sewre +tat schall plese his grace beste, and cawse me
to thynke +tat ye lofe my honor, and y trust schalbe to your
sewrte. Y pray youe remembyr this, as y schall remembyr youe in
tyme to come, by +te grace of Jhesu, who ever preserve youe.
Wreten at Lyncolne +te xj day of Octobyr.
   Your hertely lovyng 
   Cosyn ffraunceys Lovell.
   Also Cosyn, +te kyng hath commawndyd me to sende youe worde
to make youe redy, and all your compeny, in all hast to be with
his grace at Leyceter +te Monday +te xx day of Octobyr: for I
have sent for all my men to mete me at Bannebery, +te Soterday
+te xviij day of Octobyr.
   To my Cosyn [{Syr{] William Stoner.

<S SAMPLE 2>
<Q STO 1429? T1STONOR>
<A THOMAS STONOR1>
<G M>
<P III,4> 
[} [\341. THOMAS STONOR TO JOHN WARFIELD.\] }] 
[\(1429 ?)\] 
   Warfeld, I gr[{ete{] +gow well, doyng +gow to wyte that the
borwis of Will. Spileman and Thomas Spileman have be wyth me
sith that I spoke wyth +gow laste, and desiryd that I schulde
putte hem to sum yssu how they my+gth trye hem silf fre or
bounde; and I answeryd hem that ther ys a comyn lawe to all the
Kyngys legee pepil, the whiche ys opyn to all men that wull sue
hyt, the whiche in myne part I most nedis abyde: and I askyd the
Borwys hyf they woulde sue for hem, and they borwis seyde nay,
but that they prayd me that they my+gth brynge in to me the
tweyne brotherin and her goodes and to be dischargyd of her
bonds: and so on Wednysday next comyng they borwys wull be wyth
me to bryngge the Spilemannys and her goodys to me, hopyng to be
dischargyd of her bondys: And as hyt is do me to undirstonde
that Will. Spileman seyth that thow I have all hys goodys and
prisone hys body he wull nevyr knowleche hym bounde to deye
therefore: and how I shall governe me in this mater I pray +gow
to sende to me a scrowe. Also as towchyng the person of
Dudecote, he was wyth me, and as whanne I speke wyth hym last at
Hampden he 
<P III,5> 
seyde he wuld paye to me the money the whiche I wroot to hym
for, so that I wulde suffre hym to have a preste to serve hys
chirche and he to dwell wyth me and wheere I wulde suffre hym:
but I grauntyd hym nat hys askyn, but +gyt netherles to put all
thyng in reste and for cause he hath cristenyd a child of myne,
and I hold it best to suffre hym a whyle to be absent, and I
pray +gow, he is now at London, enqueryth how he governyth hym
there, and sendyth me wurde. Also as towchyng to a Charyngworthe
I pray +gow to ende hyt or +ge come thenys, and lat hym be
bounde or ell he wull nat abyde the ende. Also for[{+g{]ytyth
nat ffortescew as for the wode at Erm. And I pray +gow to se
redyly the (\diem claus. extremum\) of the lord Seynt John. Also
I pray +gow to take the money of Clopton, and brynge hyt wyth
+gow. Also speke +ge to my Maister whanne Cricklade and W .. te
meete to gedere for myn brotherys wille.
   Thomas St. [^LATIN MEMORANDUM OMITTED^] 

<Q STO 1471 EDWARD4>
<A PRIVY SEAL>
<G N>
<P III,10> 
[} [\347. LETTER OF PRIVY SEAL TO HUMPHREY FORSTER AND OTHERS.\]
}] 
[\16 April 1471\] 
By +t=e= Kyng. 
   Trusty and webelovid we grete you wel, latyng you wete +tat
in our Batel late had, whereof God of his grete grace hathe
yeven us vyctory, owre Rebelles and traytours, +t=e= Duke of
Excetr., +t=e= marquis Montagu, +t=e= Erles of Warwyk and
Oxinford with other ben slayne, and +t=e= remenaunt put to
flyght, for +t=e= whiche we and alle oure trew Subgettes owe to
yeve laude and thonke to God of whom alle grace cometh: Wherfor
we desire and pray you as oure trew Subgettes to thanke hym
+terof, willyng also alle other to yeve unto hym lawdes and
thankes for +t=e= same: And over this we woll +tat ye charge and
commaunde on oure behalf alle people of oure Countee of Oxinford
and other places near ajoynyng to +t=e= same of ye age of be
twyxte lx=ti= and xvj=ne= yeres, hable to do us servise to be
redy in alle possible hast in +tere most defensible araye and
theym so arayde bryng unto us for +t=e= repressyng and subdewyng
of certeyn oure Rebelles enemyes and traytours, not failyng
herof us ye wol answere unto us at your peryl. Yeven under oure
prive Seall at oure Cite of London +t=e= xvj day of Aprill.
   To our trusty and welbelovid Humfrey fforster +t=e= elder,
Christofer Harecourt, Richard Crofte, John Harecourt, Humfrey
fforster +t=e= yonger, and John Charleton and to everyche of
them. 

<Q STO 1480 WELMES>
<A WALTER ELMES>
<G M>
<P III,16> 
[} [\354. WALTER ELMES TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR.\] }] 
[\(c. 1480.)\] 
   Ryth wurschipfull mayster, I recommaund me unto, and I have,
syne Harry Parsone was with me, kast my boke of my Rescye[{t{]
of your lond this yere as folowyth.
[^BOOKKEEPING OMITTED^]
Syr, I beseche yow to remembre this, and take me as I entende. I
wuld plese yow by +t=e= blessyd lord. Syr, I besech yow to aske
me no more money of me, and such money as I have resceyvyd of my
lord of Suff. by the blessyd sacrement I have kast my boke and I
have spent, thereof xx (^li.^) wych I must nedys borow ayenst
+t=e= audyte or ells I am utterly shamyd and lese my offyce for
ever. 
<P III,17> 
And such money as Germyn bryngyth, ye shall have all save x
marke that I wuld were payyd for yowr wyne at London. Syr, I
trust by +t=t= tyme +t=t= y=e= have poysyd this in yowr mynd ye
wull be god mayster to me as ever ye have bene, and were I owt
of trobull trust to do more to yowr plesure &c: as of Horton,
Watlyngton, Redyng, Borowscott, Hoddysdon I have not reseyvyd on
j (^d.^) this yere. And owr lord preserve yow.
   Yowr seruant W. Elmes.
   By my trouth I kowde not slepe for sorowe this nygth.
[\IN DORSO\]
   Item, for my costes to London, ij (^d. ob.^)
   Item, for my horsemete at Cawsham, ij (^d.^)
   Item, for my sowper and Thomas at Hawmulds, ij (^d.^) 

<Q STO 1480 HFORSTER>
<A HUMPHREY FORSTER>
<G M>
<P III,17> 
[} [\355. HUMPHREY FORSTER TO SIR WILLIAM STONOR.\] }] 
[\(c. 1480.)\]
   Right worshipfull nevewe, in my most feythefull wyse I
recommaunde me to you. And pleaseth you to wete that one Robert
Bolle, a tenaunt of myne of Henle hath be with me and enformed
me that his Brother dwellyng at Rysborowe shuld be atached for a
Scot by servauntes of yours, wher in dede he is none, for he and
his brother that is my servaunt were bore but ij myle from syr
James Strangewy[{sshes place{] . whiche is fifty myle from
Scotlond and more. And his fader and moder t[{enaunts{] to syr
James Strangewissh, which wolle be dewly proved: wherfore I
beseche yow to showe your favorabill maistership to them as
conciens and ryght require. And Jesu preserve yow. Wreten in
hast this same Moneday. Thomas Raufe was with me this same
Moneday in +t=e= mornyng, for Poughlowe lond to understond what
direccion Herre Doget wold abide: and he tolde me that he most
ryde with his moder to Sotwell and Dodecote
   Your owne Humffrey fforster
   To my most worshipfull Nevewe Syr William Stonore in hast. 



<B MARCHALL>

[^LETTERS FROM THE MARCHALL CORRESPONDENCE. ED. BY KERNEN,
JUKKA, TERTTU NEVALAINEN AND ARJA NURMI. PUBLIC RECORD OFFICE,
SC 1. 1996.^]

<Q MAR 1440S? TMAYKYN>
<A THOMAS MAYKYN>
<G M>
<P F35>
[} [\SC 1: xliv, 35. THOMAS MAYKYN TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Well by louyd and trusty frende I recomende me to +gow,
lykyng yow to vnderstonde that Robert Quynarton hath enformyd me
how +t=t= Aleyne Jonysson hath your brother Richarde and me at
exigent; y=e= wherfor I p~y yow, as I may do yow eny s~uyse in
tyme comyng, y=t= in all hast y=t= ye may dessyre to speke w~
hy~, and to wete what day of payement he woll asyne yow in oure
name, for, syr, my parte of +t~ dette ys but xix s viij d And
youre brother Richarde as myche, the wherfor as my parte comyth
to I p~y yow but yyf ye may take a day resonable y=t= ye wolle
contente hy~ of xix s viijd, for h~ is no more of trowthe. And
y=t= may ye p~ve by h~s boke of accompte by twene vs. And syr I
schall paye to Thom~s Grace your Carpent~r as myche in youre
name so y=t= he schall be well plesyd w~ goddys grace. And syr,
as to your brother Richarde, I suppose w~ your good entretyse
y=t= he wolde yeue hy~ lenger day yanne me. And forthermore I
deme but for my p~sone y=t= he wolde neu~ take sewte ayen
Richarde by cause of olde acqueyntawnse, and also ye may sey vn
to hy~ y=t= Richarde yafe hy~ x li. of golde in a day and y~ for
he may y=e= bett~ for yeue xix s viij d. And as to my parte of
y=e= costys, I p~y yow maketh hy~ to for yeue at your request
yyf ye may, yyf not endeth with hym in all wyse y=t= I be
harmeles as I truste fully in yow. No more at y=s= tyme but how
ye spede in y=s= matt~ I p~y yow sendeth me aletter in hast. And
y=e= holy goost haue yow in h~s kepyng. I wryte at Wodestoke in
grete hast y=e= Sonday after Est~ day.
   By Thom~s Maykyn.
And syr I sende yow a bylle of y=e= laste accompte y=t= Aleyne
Johnson, your brother Richard & I made last to ged~ in london in
h~s cownt~.
[\ADDRESSED\] To my tresty frende William Marchall Clerke of ye
Chawnsery. 

<Q MAR 1450S? WTHAME>
<A WALTER THAME>
<G M>
<P F43>
[} [\SC 1: xliv, 43. WALTER THAME TO THOMAS DANE.\] }]
   Ry+gt reu~end and worschepefull Cosyn, I cumma~de me on to
y+gow desy[{r{]yng hertely to here of y+gowyr whelfare and good
prosperite, y=e= whyche y be seche all myty god to manteyne and
incresse to hys pleysyng and to y+gouyre hertys desyyre; and yf
hyt pleyse y+gowe to here of my wellfare at y=e= maky~g of yis
lettyr I whasse in good hellte; ferthyr mor gefeyng y+gow
knowlege at cristemasse last past I be gan Arte, purposyng w~h
the grase of all myty god and my good fryndys to continu forthe
there in, trustyng to god y=t= +ge wyll be on to me there yn
hensseforward as ye affe byn here a forre, & there to y bes eche
yyow w~h all my harte; also my fathyr and mothyr and my gransar
cumawnd them on to yow hertely to here of yyowyr whellffar;
gefeyng yyow knolege that my brothyr Jon by the wyllys of hys
fry~dys beyng there ny hym hathe gett hym a wyfe and y~for my
fathyr and my mothyr and my gransare and also m[\y\] Maystyr
beddford and my Maystras & my brothyr & I bothe pray yyow
hartely yf hyt pleyse y+gow of y+gowyr goodnes to take y=s=
labyr a pon y+gow to cu~me thethyr to y=e= Weddyng, all they
pray yow hartely the whyche shall be to them grete worchepe &
joy; also y delyu~yd a peyyr of glouis to my brothyr Jon, yf hyt
pleyse y+gow to take them I pray y+gow hartely; no more to y+gow
at thys tyme but y=e= holy gost haue y+gow in h~s kepyng; thys
lettyr whas wryte at Oxford the morro afftyr syn benedyt ys day,
   be y+gowyr cosyn & also y+gowyr bed man Wat~ Thame
[\ADDRESSED\] To my worchepefull cosyn Maystyr Thomas Dane Be
thys lett~ deliu~d.

<Q MAR 1476 JMARCHALL>
<A JOHN MARCHALL>
<G M>
<P F262>
[} [\SC 1: xlvi, 262. JOHN MARCHALL TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Right welbylovyd yeme, I comawnnd me vnto you, eu~ mor~
desyring to her~ of yo~ good Welfar~, and yeffe hitt pleas you
to her~ of my welfar~ [\and CROSSED OUT\] att y=e= makyng of
this lett~ I was in good hele, blessyd by god; and fforthirmor~
I pray you to Recomawnnd me to Cornnewell and his wiffe w~ all
his housold, to Thom~s hosyar & his wiffe, pyry and his wiffe.
To gawunt and his wiffe/ and to selyte a faf~=ll= ... w~h all
odyr good frendes, as my trust ys in you/; and also I p~y you
for the Reu~ens of god se well to yo~ selffe and see +t=t= yo~
lyvelode be in saffegard, fore +tem that shall haue hitt aft~
you~ wille, and that +t~ be neu~ Trobyll her~aft~ fore hit, and
as sone as I com~ home w~ I shall see you sone aftyr; and yeffe
ye woll do so moche to send me word to london and whed~ I Come
or none lett me vnd~ stond howe ye do; hitt woll be ner~ all
halowun tyde or +t=t= I Com~ home in to ynglond, as I vnd~ stond
yete, but as sone as I Com~ to london ye shall haue Knowelege w~
godd~ grace, Whom haffe you in his blessyd keping; wretyn at
Gawunt in fflawund~is, [\atte CROSSED OUT?\] the iij=de= day of
Julle a laste past a~o lxxvj. etc.[\?\]
   By yo~ Cosyn
   John Marchall.
   ye shall vnd~stond +t=t= my ys dessecyd here, and nowe I am
he~ in his stede and a T~ney for my mast~ Wyndesor~. etc. 
[\ADDRESSED\] To my Ryght welbyloved yonkyll William Marchall at
Stanlake be sydes Abingdon in hast soyt dd. 

<Q MAR 1440S? TMAYKYN>
<A THOMAS MAYKYN>
<G M>
<P F263>
[} [\SC 1: xlvi, 263. THOMAS MAYKYN TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Welbylouyd and trusty frende, I r~mende me to yow and for as
myche as I haue schewyd to yow my trewe diligense and wryte to
yow iij lett~, the whiche ij of hem I sende to yowr brothur
Thomas and he seyeth that he sende hem to yow by xv dayes beffor
mychelmas, of the whiche ij lett~ on was of many dyue~e matters
and in speciall of the bolde of yowre chamb~, o~ yowre brother
John, and othere c~teyn matters co~prehendyd ther~in and now be
not all in mynde, and the other lett~ was closyd w=t= the
testament of yowre brothur Richard, for the whiche testament I
haue grete callyng uppon of youre Syst~ Mawde, demyng that I
restreyne hyt so to ymagyne unto her s~ fraude, whus colloca~s
suche as wher lyke to hynd~ her in tyme co~myng. Wherfor I p~y
yow in case that ye haue reseyuyd the foreseyd lett~s ande
testament so sendeth me relac~on of the matters, and yf ye haue
not reseyuyd hem so wryteth down unto your brothur Thomas in
hast to wete whare and whom he delyuy~ hem, for as thus awysyd,
he schall reseyue no mo lett~ of my hondes ne of my charge this
xx=ti= yere efte sonys trewly, for and the testament be lost
unto, lesse than ye haue eny copye +t~of I am lyke to be
dangeryd and noysyd for no trewe man; in the case wher=e=of I
p~y yow to sende me sum comforte in hast. And Syr as to the
byldyng of youre chamb~ I haue putte my labo=r= suche as ye
desyryd of me in rewarde of your=e= brothur John, and youre
brother Thomas wolde neu~ come at Wodestoke seth the worke was
by gonne, neu~rtheles seth the monday aft~ my+ghelmas day ye
haue had ij carpunt~s workyng contynewally and ij sawyers to
helpe dyuers dayes as the worke nedyd also, and +gut the
carpunters abydeth stylle and haue wrought by candell bothe euyn
and morne seth x dayes by fore all halowyntyde in on of the
wollehouse, and there they haue framyd halfe the chamb~ flore
and all the p~opatt work of the jetey w=t= goodely wyndowys,
thatt is to wete in the fronte a wyndowe of iiij bayes and in
eu~y syde a goodely wyndowe of ij bayes, and all the flore and
p~opatt tymb~ of that chamb~ is and schall be goode trewe hert
of oke, and the rafters we p~pose of elme, and hardely doute yow
not your=e= chamb~ flore schall be stronge y now+g and ye wolde
cowche pypys of wyne uppon and than ye schall not bende h=t=
w=t= dawnsyng ly+gtly. Syr, there as ye hopyd to haue all the
chamb~ made redy by Crystemasse, me thenketh youre avayle is the
cont~ry as I schall enforme yow, for the grete hyll wall in to
the yerde syde is flowe so that we moste othur take h=t= d~n
othur ellys drawe h=t= upry+gth a+gen by goode crafte, and so
men of crafte haueth p~mysyd me w=t= goddys g~ce; and also now
the dayes wexeth shorte and god g~te that the chamb~ will not
falle d~n hy~ selfe; I p~pose sauyng your=e= bett~ avyse to lete
all thynges contynewe unto aft~ the feste of Crystemasse and
anon aft~ for doute of fallyng down than to take hyt down in the
beste tyme of the newe yere. Also I merveyle gretly of a lett~
that I sende yow by a p~son of Gloucet~ schyre, and he callyd
hy~ selfe a preste of my lordys chapell of Cawnt~bury and
enformyd me that he knew yow well, and p~mysyd me that ye
schulde haue that lett~ uppon all halowynday at the ferrust, for
he was loggyd with me the sat~day ny+gt by fore, and the same
ny+gt in hast I wrote yow that lett~ and in speciall for money,
xl s that ye schulde sende me to paye bothe carpunters and
sawyers as for yowre parte, and of all the tymb~ I haue bou+ght
w=t= caryage I haue payd byt a parte to plese eu~y man unto more
money come to me, and +gut I am not all payd of the money of
Blakenale, sauyng I hade the rent of youre medys that ys xj s
viij d for bothe and thus I haue spoke fayr and eu~y day lokyd
aft~ money fro yow. And as to Will~m Astell and Mawde youre
Syst~, they haue brou+gt to Wodestoke tymber resonable as for
here parte bothe oke and elme, but of money they be strange to
p~te w=t= to paye workemen, for as +gut I cowde neu~ reseyue of
hem but xiij s iiij d and the got~ at Blakenalys coste xx d and
more. And the worke and tymb~ of the newe chamb~ hath coste at
th=s= day more than vij nobles and +gut we lakke tymb~, the
whiche I haue bou+gt and haue no money to pay therefore, so no
caryage also unto h=t= come fro yow. And as to the bede, I haue
h=t= home fro Kyrtlyngton and haue amendyd hy=t= as nede was and
is now sette in her olde forme a+gen in the beste wyse and that
hath coste all moost iiij s. And as to the bede ye desyryd to
haue bou+gth, hy=t= was solde as that I had youre lett~. And as
touchyng to Thomas Maso~ I sende by worde as ye desyryd me that
I schulde. No more unto yow at th=s= tyme, but I p~y yow yf I
schall do yow seruyse eny more in suche man~ occupacon that I do
not care bothe to ordeyne money and all other matters that
longeth +t~to also, for that me thenketh is to grete a charge.
And all my+gty Jh~u haue yow in h=s= gou~naunse. I wryte at
Wodestoke in hast the Sat~day aft~ Seynt Hewe day the Bysschep.
And Syr I sende yow th~ lett~ by a carry~ of Oxforde, to the
whiche I p~y yow delyu~ xl s w=t= out more and charge hym to
sende h=t= me in hast, and yf ye wyll bye 1 lb of powd~ pepp~ to
carye money surely I will paye therfor, other ellys ij lb of Rys
for that makyth grette bolke. And the cary~ is at Inne in Fryday
Strete, at the Belle, other ellys at the Saresen hede as I
suppose.
   By youre owne
   Thomas Maykyn.
[\ADDRESSED\] London. Be th~ lett~ delyu~yd unto William
Marchall clerke of the Chaunsery dwellyng in Seynt Bartholomewys
Spytyll w=t= my mayster Sturgeon clerke of the Crowne in
Smythfelde. 

<Q MAR 1450S? JCOLLAS>
<A JOHN COLLAS>
<G M>
<P F268>
[} [\SC 1: xlvi, 268. JOHN COLLAS TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Jh~u.
   Ryght Reverent and Most best be lowyd modyr I Recummaund me
on to you desyryng hertly eu~ more to here off your well ffar
also I p~y hartlly of y~r blessyng both day & nyth. Also my
brodyr & Syst~ I recum~aund me on to you as hertly as I cane,
thankyng yow eu~ more for y=e= gret cher +t=t= I had vane y=t= I
vas last att home w~ you. Also lettyng you vyte at y=e= makyng
of thys lett~ my brodyr Wylly~m & my Syst~ ys vyfe & halle the
howsold & Margery my Syst~ and [{her{] hosbond ver in gowde
helle & all her howsold Also Thom~s Marchalle yo~r Sone
Recum~awnd hyme hartelley one to you & to ys m[{o{]dyr & to ys
goud beldame & he p~yth you hertly of yo~ blesyng both nyth and
day and blesyd be Jh~u he ys in Ryth goude hele. Also I ondyre
stonde y=t= ye haue y send for hyme as be kawse y=t= the dy fast
att londone, letyng you vyt bleseyd be Jh~u the do not dy no
more. Also I p~y you & my Syst~ & my goud modyre y=t= ye vyle
not takeyth for no dysplesure y=t= I do not send hym wome for
letyng you vyth y=t= the chylld ys Rygth vele hentyrd in to ys
Songe, y=t= ys say bouth playnsonge & prykyd sounge. Also I
vndyrstond and he chuld com to you y=t= he chuld for gete alle
y=t= he hathe lerned w~ me & y=t= chuld be to me gret heuynesse
and I p~y you y=t= ye vyll not be dyplesyd w~h me for w~ y=e=
grace of good y=e= nextyme y=t= thom~s yo~r sone comyth vome to
you I trust to good y=t= he schall be glad & all ys Kyne y=t= he
vente eu~ to Skolle w~h me, for now ys hys makyng & now ys hys
maryng; nat w~ stondyng and ye vyll haue hyme ye chall; y=e=
kause y=t= I do note send hym vome I haue vyryth on to you. Also
letyng you vyth y=t= I vas neuyr so syke send y=t= ye ver w~h me
last for I had vent y=t= I chuld neu~r a lewyd for I vas takyne
Sode~ly att hour lady masse y=t= I koud not stond & then I vent
to the barbare and lett my selfe blod or ellys I trow y=t= I had
be ded, blesyd be Jh~u of a meme~te, for I vot vell y=t= my god
modyr dyde geue me her blesying, also lettyng you vyt y=t=
Wyllyam my brodyr haue gret maruelle y=t= ye Do not send hyme no
lett~. Also letyng you vyte y=t= hellyn valle & hall you~ god
frend~ for~th Ryght velle.
   Thys leter vas made opon Korpuskryste day.
[\ADDRESSED\] Tho Wylly~m Marchall dwellyng att Stanlake be thys
lett~ delywyrd. 

<Q MAR 1440S RMARCHALL>
<A RICHARD? MARCHALL>
<G M>
<P F71>
[} [\SC 1: li, 71. RICHARD(?) MARCHALL TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Reuerent & worchipfull Brodyr I recomawnde me unto yow
desyryng to here of your wellfar & prosperyte, the wyche god
encresse for hys m~cy. Also Syr I pray god qwyte yow of your
grete gentylies y=t= ye do to me. Also Syr I was not at Wodstoke
syth I was at london, for wee hawe suche bysnesse y=t= I my+gth
not, but I purpose me to goo to Wodstoke y=e= same day y=t= y=e=
letter was made & +tanne I schall sende +gow word of all +tyng
how yt ys. Also Syr I wolde pray & I durst y=t= ye wolde speke
to y=r= master to borrow xxx=li= or els xx=li= un to synt
bartolmews day, & truly +tanne +gee schull hawe yt +gayn with
y=e= grace god & erste for sothe yee schull not fayle +tanne,
ffor pegotte owyth hym C=s=, for he schull hadde at Wyytsontyde
iij score ss, & I p~y yow sende how we schull spede; namore I
wrytte un to yow at y=s= tyme but ye holy trinete hawe yow yn
hys kepyng body & sowle. I-wrytte at Kyrtlynton on synt peters
day,
   By your Brodyr R.M.
[\ADDRESSED\] To Wylliam Marchall with Sturgeon clerke of the
Crowne. 

<Q MAR 1440S RMARCHALL>
<A RICHARD MARCHALL>
<G M>
<P F72>
[} [\SC 1: li, 72. RICHARD MARCHALL TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Jhesu.
   Worchipfull Brodyr I comawnde me un yow desyryng to here of
y=r= good hele the qwyche god encresse for hys m~cy, & I pray
god qwyte yow of +te g~te byngnesse & grete Cost y=t= yee do to
my ffader & to me, & I pray yow to comawnde me un to Syr Thomas
halys & I pray yow thonggyth hym myche for me. Also Syr I pray
yow as myche as ffader and I may y=t= yee woll speke un to your
master for y=e= summe of money y=t= wee spoke to yow, for y=e=
encresse shall turne to me as well as to my fad~ & your labor
schall be qwytte for y=s= howr; hayth payd eu~y may, & men crye
on hym for to [\shalbe CROSSED OUT\] bye here woll & truly yt
wowolde be a grete assayle un to my fader & to me & as euer I
may be your s~uant y=t= +gee labor there for, or els y=t= wee
may not bye no woll & y=t= qwere grete herte unto us & schame. I
wrytte at bursset~ ye sonday a fore Myssom~ day, for my Wyffe &
I weryn at dyn~ w~h bettes y=e= same sonday & I pray yow
thonggyth hym yer for.
   By y~r Brodyr & s~uant
   Rychard Marchall.
[\ADDRESSED\] Wylyam Marchall & Bel ... Smyythfelde at london
with Sturgeon clerke of y=e= Crowne. 

<Q MAR 1440S TMAYKYN>
<A THOMAS MAYKYN>
<G M>
<P F73>
[} [\SC 1: li, 73. THOMAS MAYKYN TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Well by louyd Syr I grete yow well, prayiyng yow +t=t= +ge
welle sende me redy worde zyf Will~m hethe ffyschemong~ be
contente of h~s money, for I sende a lett~ to John Ryngefelde
D~p~ of Cornehyll y=t= he schulde contente hy~ and he sende me
worde a+gen y=t= he wolde so do but +gyf Nicolas Mundy wolde.
And Syr I pray zow y=t= ze wore wete of Rob~t Quynaton how my
mat~ spedeth and sende+t me worde whed~ ye haue payde hym x=s=
lyke as I wrote to yow, and forthermore I pray yow y=t= ye
sende+t me by y=e= brynger of y=s= bylle y=e= ij golde ryng~,
for Richarde y~r brod~ truste+t to yow y=t= ye woll; and I pray
yow y=t= ye sende me a viij s j d. lyke as ye know y=t= is to me
dewe, for all youre rente is to lytyll to rep~yr y=e= Sclatte
and od~ fawtys of Rob~t Webbe his house. No more at y=s= tyme
but I pray yow of all yese mattyrs sende+t me redy answeres and
all my+gtty Jh~u haue yow in h~s gou~nawnse. I wryte at
Wodestoke uppon Candelmasse day.
   Thomas Maykyn.
[\ADDRESSED\] To Will~m Marchall dwellyng with Sturgeon Clerke
of y=e= Crowne at Seynt Bartolmews Spytyll. 

<Q MAR 1440S TMAYKYN>
<A THOMAS MAYKYN>
<G M>
<P F74>
[} [\SC 1: li, 74. THOMAS MAYKYN TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Well by louyd syr I grete +gow well, doyng +gow to
undurstonde +t=t= I sende +gow a lett~ by Thom~ +gour brother,
+t=e= whiche lett~ Thom~s Tayllo~ of Wodestoke hadde p~mysyd me
to haue brou+gt to +gow +t=e= xiiij day of Dece~b~. No+gt w~
stondyng +t=t= I pray +gow take+t credens & considerac~on to
+t=e= seyd lett~ diligently lyke as I haue wryte to +gow, exepte
a matt~ +t=t= is to sey there as I haue wryte to +gow +t=t= +ge
shulde sende me xxj s v d, +g~ moste sende me xl d more +t~ to,
for +gour Cosyn dan Jon Wodestoke hath payd me but xl d of +t=e=
nobyll & no day he woll sette me of y=e= Re~nawnt. fforthermore
as towchyng to +gour grete place, at +t=s= day ~it stonde+t
vacant & +t=t= is harme, wherefor me +tynke+t h~t were best and
moste worschippe to +gow +t=t= Thomas +gour brother my+gt be w~
+gour helpe p~ferryd +t~ in. [\ILLEGIBLE\]er +gour brother
Richarde is not well wyllyd +t~ to, No+gt w~ stondyng +t=t=
+gour brother Thom~s grawntyth to pay +t~ for as anoder man
wolde and y=er= of to fynde sewrte. The wherfor I pray yow
wrytey a letter to hym, and anod~ to Sauage & to me, as +t=t=
+ge hadde no knowlyche of +t=e= mat~ by me but only aft~ +gour
goode avyse and by +t=e= mocyon of +gour brother Thom~s; and
fforthermore +gyf +ge +tynke h~t were to do & buth well y wyllyd
in +t=s= mat~, +ge may wryte to us in gen~all +t=t= +t=e=
bargayne is halfe made aft~ iiij noblys +gerely & +ge to bere
+t=e= Rep~ac~on for so od~ men p~feruth +t~ for. No more at
+t=s= tyme but I p~y +gow sende+t me +t=s= foreseyd money by
Thom~s +gour brother as secrete as +ge may & Jh~u haue +gow in
h~s kepyng. I wryte at Wodestoke in grete hast +t=e= xxiiij day
of Dece~b~.
   Thomas Maykyn.
[\ADDRESSED\] To William Marchall. 

<Q MAR 1440S JSMYTHE>
<A JOHN SMYTHE>
<G M>
<P F83>
[} [\SC 1: li, 83. JOHN SMYTHE TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Worschypfull Syr I recomende me to yow, lykyng yow to
vndurstonde that as towchyng to y=e= Rep~acion of youre house
y=t= I dwelle inne, for sothe I haue well and trewly payde your
rente in to y=e= laste terme day of oure lady vn to Sauage.
No+gt w~ stondyng for sothe y~ was neu~ peny by sette on y=e=
place sethe y=e= tyme y=t= ye were at Wodestoke last and y=t= is
to me grete harme and dysese in good trouthe, p~ncipally of y=e=
ende of y=e= Cuch~n towarde Snareston for +ge sye well your
selfe y=t= h~t was feble but now h~t is myche worse. And y~ for
syr I p~y yow ordeyneth a remedye s~what for my [\HOLE IN
MANUSCRIPT\] lyke as I haue quytte me trewly unto yow.
fforthermore as towchyng y=e= Rep~acion and gou~nawnse of y=e=
house whan h~t schall be take down, I p~y +gow, lyke as I haue
be vnto yow goode ten~nt and p~pose to be hereaft~, y=t= I may
haue resonable warnyng so y=t= I be not lette of my worke y~by;
and +gyf I schall be +gour ten~nt aft~ h~t ys newe made I p~y
+gow sendeth me redy worde how and of what p~se I schall be
ten~nt. And syr +ge othur I moste make me a newe chymney for my
crafte +gyf I schall abyde y=er=inne and y=er=for ordeyneth how
h~t schall be rewlyd and I woll take h~t for y=e= t~me of vij
+gere and y=er=for syr +gyf I schall haue h~t I pray +gow
sendeth me redy worde and not to grete a rente, for syr y=e=
worlde w~ us ys harde and scharpe and ellys I moste p~vey me
anod~. Also as towchyng to y=e= mowndes aboute my gardeyne for
sothe ye moste sende worde to Snarestion y=t= be amende y=s= to
syde, and syr I haue spoke to Maykyn and he hath g~wnte me that
h~t p~te schall be made in hast w~h out fayle for he sawe nere
y=e= defaute un to Sonday last was. No more un to yow at y=s=
tyme but almy+gtty Jh~u haue yow in h~s kepyng. I wryte at
Wodestoke in haste y=e= Monday aft~ seynt George day.
   By your ten~nt,
   John Smyth~.
[\ADDRESSED\] To my worschypfull syr Willi~m Marchall.

<Q MAR 1450S? JCOLLAS>
<A JOHN COLLAS>
<G M>
<P F49>
[} [\SC 1: lviii, 49. JOHN COLLAS TO WILLIAM MARCHALL.\] }]
   Ryth Reu~ant and velbelowyd worschyp ffull modyr and brodyr &
Syst~, wyth all my hart I reco~awnd me to you, desyryng my God
modyr hartlly off your blessyng both day and nyte, desyryng w=t=
all my hart to her of yo~ vell far eu~ more, both day and nyte,
that I be sech Allmyty Jhe~ cep you all in porsperyte and in hel
& in long lyffe to goodes plesu~ amen; lettyng you vyt hat the
makyng of thys lett~ I vas in god hel; the cawse of my vrytyng
to you hat tystyme ys for to let you haue cnowlach that I ham in
s~uyce with my lord of ely. I thanke Good ther of hartly for be
my trowt I let you haue hondyrstandyng that I vas neu~ meryer
nor bett~ hat yef, nor bett~ be lowyd in no plase that yeu~ I
dwelld in, & that ys both w=t= my lord and w=t= all the
gentyllme~ and all the howssold; letyng you vyte I haue in
vagges be yer iij li. and ij Gownys and as for my met and drynke
I neu~ fard bett~ in no plase that eu~ I come in and that ys
daly; lettyng you vyt my lord hath in ys chappell dayly xxvj=ti=
serplers and viij chylldyrne &c; lettyng you vyt as my trobyll
that I vas in, I thanke good and my god mastyrs yt ys hat a god
yend, & ther for I p~y you, jentyll brodyr, Comfort my god modyr
and let not her take no thowgt ther for, sche schall haue neu~ a
cawsse be the g~ce of good; I vot Ryte vell sche hath take gret
thowth that I Repent me full, for not w=t= stondyng I hame not
the furst that a ben be gylyd nor schall not be the last, and
has for hyme y=t= dyd be gylle me, I trow at the long Renyng a
dyd be gyle hymeself and that I schall hondyrstand & yevyr a com
in my dawnger thaw I haue lost a lytyll money I trust to good
for to get as mych Ryt vell; and ther for I p~y you hartlly take
no thowt ther for; I p~y you hartlly be Ryt mery eu~y schon, for
good ys ther as a vas and sondsstt~ myellmasse I truste in good
to se yo=ur= vell far, both I & my vyff allsso; no mor to you at
tystyme, butt, jentyll brodyr and Syst~, chereth vell my god
modyr & to my power I schall; I p~y good hartlly cep you and me
and hus all for ys blesyd marcy, Ame~. Vrytyn at downam in my
lordes plase of ely, the Sonday afft~ Sent baroulmess day,
   Be yo~ brodyr,
   John Collas.
[\ADDRESSED\] To Wyll~m Marchalle dwellyng in Stanlake be thys
lett~ dyllyu~d I p~y you in hast.

<Q MAR 1476 JMARCHALL>
<A JOHN MARCHALL>
<G M>
<P F50>
[} [\SC 1: lx, 50/37. JOHN MARCHALL TO NICHOLAS MARCHALL.\] }]
   Jh~u.
   Ryght welbelouyd Cosyn I recomawund me unto you & to my Cosyn
yo~ wyffe w~ all my Cosyns yo~ Cheld~yn, w~ all od~ good ffrend~
&c; fforthyrmor ye shall und~stonde y=t= ye shall ressayve in
thys boxe my dede of ffeffement y=e= whiche ye vnd~stond Ryght
well, of y=e= whiche I p~y you to se +t=t= Rob austen may take
state ther by, ffor as I vnd~stond be demynge +t~ woll be
Trobyll ther for in shorte space be Twyxte my mod~ & me, ffor I
haffe profyrde her all her dewte yeven aft~ her owne axing, butt
she hathe answeryde [\she CROSSED OUT\] me shortly howe +t=t=
she woll non Resseyve tyll her hosbonde & I haffe Reconyde to
gedyrr, &e whate she men y=r= in I wote neu~, butt I hold hytt
nott for no good and there for I wolde fayne haffe hytt spede;
and as for myn yem~ ded~, +tey be nott made, for be Cawse of
Thomas my Cosyn hathe bownde hym selffe p~nteyis w=t= outt leue
of his fad~ or any ffrend +t=t= he hathe, and yeffe his mast~
hade bene any man of Theryffe hytt shold a skelyd the lesse,
butt he woll not be Rulyd as I vnd~ stond for no frend +t=t= he
hathe but be his owne Reson, and that ys full febyll, god
knowythe, and +t=t= I am Ryght sory of. And ye may say to my
yeme y=t= as for hys lyffelood lett hym makythe sure for, &
yeffe hytt fortune +t=t= he decese w=t= owt any state makyng,
Thomas & hys mast~ woll make a m~chauntdyce ther w=t= in short
space; and I herd my Cosyn Thomas say +t=t= he woll com home
+t=is= Crystm~s w=t= his mast~ and whan he comethe he woll looke
in his fad~is Chest~ and he woll haue sume of hytt w=t= hym to
london, and +t=r= for Take good hede +t=r= of tyll I com and I
woll be wt you a bowghte Candelm~s wt godd~ grace or soone aft~;
and her I send you +t=e= old ded~ of my yemys for to make +t=e=
Tod~ by, &e as for +te ded~ of Stanlake lett hym make +t=e= wyll
aftyr +t=e= todyr dede off Wodstok; +tey hadde bene made Redy
butt I wyst nott whe+t~ he wold haue hitt so or non, and nowe he
may make hitt yevyn as he woll and +t=t= lett hym doo in short
space &e lett Newor~ wryght hem; and I p~y you Take vpe my
Rennt~ as ny as ye can, ayenst I co~ to you. And ye may haue
ffleshe of Edmond bochor for Rente I pray you Take hytt vpe, for
my money, and yeffe he woll nott pay me my money nor ffleshe, I
shall swe hym &c. M=rs= Parme a=d= I may haffe his name. No mor
to you at +t=is= tyme, butt god haue you in his kepyng; wretyn
at london in lymestret on Wendynsday last passyd. By yo~ Cosyn
   John Marchall.
[\ADDRESSED\] To my Cosyn Nycolas Marchall of Wodestooke in hast
&c. 



<B SHILLING>

[^LETTERS AND PAPERS OF JOHN SHILLINGFORD, MAYOR OF EXETER 1447-
50. EDITED BY MOORE, STUART A. CAMDEN NEW SERIES 2. 1871/1965.^]

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 3>
[} [\II. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS AT EXETER. DRAFT LETTER.\]
}]
   Worthy sires y grete yow well alle; doyng yow to understonde
that y rode fro Excetre on Fryday and cam to London on Tywysday
by tyme at vii atte cloke; and ther sithenys have full bisily
labored to make an answere to the articulys. The cause of so
longe taryng yn makyng of the answers hath be for right grete
bysynes y=t= Alisaunder Hody hath hadde aboute his awne maters;
netheles by the avys of Alisaunder Hody and Dowrisshe and Roger
Rawly, [\they\] beth made as may be yn so shorte tyme, trustyng
to God that al the substance ys comprehended ther ynne, so that
what tyme
<P 4>
hit is amended, corected and made by avys of counseyll to be
right well; of the whiche answeris so shortely made y sende to
yow ij. copies, oon to be send to the Recorder yn hast yf hit
may be for shortenys of tyme, &c., that other copy to abide w=t=
yow, prayng yow Thomas Cook most specially w=t= the lu tenaunt,
callyng to yow William Noble, Coteler, Druell, and other wham ye
seme is to be don, and that this answer be sadly over seyn; and
yf eny thyng be ther yn to myche or to litell yn substance to
sette the penne to sadly [\ORIGINALLY to sette to the penne
sadly\] . This don y pray yow to calle be fore yow atte halle
[\in my name ERASED\] the substance of the comminalte, praynge
every of tham yn my name and chargyng tham yn +te most streytest
wyse yn the Kynges byhalf to come to fore yow yn haste for the
tydyngs that y have sent home to yow; and that ye wysely declare
to fore tham these answers; so that they sey manly yee and nay
yn suche poyntes as yow thynke to be don, &c. and +t=t= +tey
wyll abide by +t=e= answers yn all wyse, and that labo=r= and
spekyng be before to that entent. This don y pray yow that y
have a gode man sende to me yn hast.

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 4>
[} [\III. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS. LONDON, OCT. 30TH, 1447.
DRAFT LETTER.\] }] 
   Memo=d= that on Monedey next before the feste of Seynt Luke
the yere of the regne of the kyng that now is xxvj (Henry VI.)
<P 5>
Richard Druell, William Speere and Henry Dobyn w=t= ham rode
oute of Exceter to London-ward for nedes of the cite, that is to
seye to kepe the dey of apparence atte xv. of Seynt Michall as
the cite was bounde to, as hit appereth by a bounde
condycionell, havyng w=t= ham sufficiant power and the comyn
seell and xl s. of John Shillingford, Mayer, and xx s. of John
Germyn, for their coustages; and so departed the seyde Monedey
yerly. And as tochyng the seyde xl s. w=t= xl s. more that the
seyde John Mayer payed to Trevylian, he was payed ayen by the
feloship of the collecte mony to the plee, &c. How the seyde
Richard Druell and William Speere spedde when they came to
London hit appereth yn a sedule by the sayde Richard Druell and
William Speer therof made, remaynyng w=t= the [\seyde\] Rychard
Druell. Forthermore as tochyng the goynge of the seyde John
Shillyngforde, mayer, he was all redy for to ride the seide
Monedey: varians y moved bytwene hym and the seyde Richard
Druell, nerthelez better accorde hadde by mene of Thomas Cook,
Richard Druell w=t= other held his wey, and the seyde mayer
abode at home yn to a tuysday next after Seynt Luke is dey for
settyng of the kynges dyme, comyng of Trevylian, and other grete
maters toching the cite, and yn especiall to have the feloship
togeder, a sadde communicacion to be had or his departyng, the
whiche communicacion myght not be had before Saterdey next after
Seynt Luke is dey for this cause that the grete part of the
feloship was at Calston is fayre, and thoo that war at home, as
Upton, Coteler and Pope, were syke on theire beddes; and for
alle these causes the mayer abode at home so longe, and all that
tyme he kepte his iij. hors yn stabill every dey redy to ride to
hym grete coste. The tuysday he rode and w=t= hym William
Hampton and John Fagot. On Wendysdey at nyght they came to
Sheftesbery and there mette w=t= Richard Druell, whiche made
reporte of his gode spede and grete laboure at London, as hit
appereth yn his sayde remembrance, and that on the beste wyse.
The Saterdey next ther after the mayer
<P 6>
came to Westminster sone apon ix. atte belle, and ther mette
w=t= my lorde Chaunceller atte brode dore a litell fro the
steire fote comyng fro the Sterre chamber, y yn the courte and
by the dore knellyng and salutyng hym yn the moste godely wyse
that y cowde and recommended yn to his gode and gracious
lordship my feloship and all the comminalte, his awne peeple and
bedmen of the Cite of Exceter. He seyde to the mayer ij. tymes
"Well come," and the iij=de=. tyme "Right well come Mayer," and
helde the mayer a grete while faste by the honde, and so went
forth to his barge and w=t= hym grete presse, lordis and other,
&c. and yn especiall the tresorer of the kynges housholde, w=t=
wham he was at right grete pryvy communicacion. And therfor y,
mayer, drowe me apart, and mette w=t= hym at his goyng yn to his
barge, and ther toke my leve of hym, seyyng these wordis, "My
lord, y wolle awayte apon youre gode lordship and youre better
leyser at another tyme." He seyde to me ayen, "Mayer, y pray yow
hertely that ye do so, and that ye speke w=t= the Chief Justyse
and what tyme that ever he will y woll be all redy." And thus
departed, &c. The Soneday abowte viij. atte clokke y came to
Lambeth, and w=t= me Dowrissh and Speere to myte and speke w=t=
my seyd lord. We mette and spake w=t= hym yn the ynner chamber,
he at that tyme beyng right bysy goynge yn to his closet. And
w=t= right gode longage and gode chere yn godely wyse exscused
hym that he myght not speke w=t= ous atte that tyme for grete
bysynes, and comaunded ous to come ayen the morun. Y, mayer,
prayed hym of oo a worde at that tyme and no more, y seyyng that
y was enfourmed that he was dysplesed of my late comyng, and yf
he so were, y bysoghte hym to hire myne excuse grete. He seyde
"Nay;" but that y was come yn right gode tyme and well come, and
at his departyng yn to his closet he seide, "Mayer, wolde God ye
hadde made a gode ende at home." And y seide, "Wolde God my lord
that we so hadde, and God y take to recorde y have done my due
dilygent part therto, and that yn tyme y truste to God ye shall
well knowe; for y have right meny thyng to enfourme yow
<P 7>
of yf y hadde tyme." He seide "Well, mayer," and bade me come
ayen that same dey afternone, and so departed, &c. Y was by the
Styward and meny other of the housholde full fayre y bede to
abide atte mete, ne never hadde better chere of my lorde ne of
the houshold then y hadde atte tyme. Netherlez y exscused me and
wold not abide as for tyme. And so went over the water to Temple
to Bluet, &c. and so went w=t= Bluet, Dowrissh, Speere and y to
the chief justice and comyned of meny thynges w=t= hym. He is
like as y conceve to have the grete rule yn this mater, for my
lorde Chaunceller seide, as hit is aboveseid, that he wolde
attende when the justyse wolde, the whiche y seide to the
justyse. The justyse seyde he wold be aredy at his callyng. And
as y conceve by dyvers wordes that they have comyned of a rule
yn this mater; what ever hit be y can not wyte as yet. God eve
[\FIRST WRITTEN yeve\] grace hit be gode, and so y truste to God
that hit be. That afternone y went ayen to Lambeth to my lord
after his commaundement aboveseid and when y come thider to hym
yn to his ynner chamber, there was myche peeple, lordes and
other, my lord Tresorer, under Tresorer, the pryvy seel, land
dyvers abbottes and pryours, and meny strangers aleyns of other
londys. And then came yn the Duke of Bokyngham, and ther was
grete bysynes at that tyme, hardly alle men were bede to avoyde
that chamber saaf the lordes. Nerthelez y awayted my tyme and
put me yn presse and went right to my lorde Chaunceller and
seide, "My lorde y am come at youre commaundement, but y se
youre grete bysynesse is suche that ye may not attende." He
seide "Noo, by his trauthe and that y myght right well se." Y
seide "Yee, and that y was sory and hadde pyty of his grete
vexacion." He seide "Mayer, y moste to morun ride by tyme to the
Kyng, and come ayen this wyke: ye most awayte apon my comyng,
and then y woll speke w=t= the justise and attende for yow, &c.
Y seide, "My lorde, y woll do after youre commaundement," and
prayed hym of hys gode and gracyous lordship of oo worde more,
yf he were enfourmed
<P 8>
by worde or by wrytyng of eny thyng that y have do or seyde or
governed me yn eny wyse at home sithen the last terme my
departyng fro hym other wyse then to his plesure and after his
commaundement. He seyde right hertly "Nay," but that y hadde
governed me at home yn the most best and godely wyse and therfor
he oowde me grete thanke, and seide hertely that y sholde have
Goddes blessyng and his therfor, &c. And so departed, &c.
   Nota that Druell and Speere is beyng afore dide gode, for
they dide theire part yn the most best wyse.

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 8>
[} [\IV. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS. LONDON, 2 NOV. 1447.\] }]
[\THE ORIGINAL OF THIS LETTER AND PART OF THE DRAFT ARE EXTANT;
THE WORDS IN BRACKETS ARE FILLED IN FROM THE DRAFT.\]
   (Worthy Sires, as yn the other letter &c. y grete yow w)ell
alle. Yn the whiche letter y wrote to yow that y hadde a dey to
<P 9>
appere before the lordis for (oure mater the Fridey next ther
after; and for as moche as) my lord Chaunceller bade the Justyse
to dyner ayenst that same day for (oure mater, seyyng that he
sholde have a dys) of salt fisshe; y hiryng this, y didde as me
thoght aughte to be done, and by avys (of the Justise and of
oure counseill, and sende) thider that day ij. stately
pikerellis and ij. stately tenchis, for the whiche my (lord
Chaunceller cowde right grete thank)ys and made right moche
therof hardely; for hit came yn gode seson, for my lordis (the
Duke of Bokyngham, the Markis) of Southfolke and other,
Bysshoppis divers dyned with my lord Chaunceller tha(t dey. But)
as touchyng the laboure and spede of oure mater that day, hit
was by my seide lorde ajorned over yn to the (morun) Saterdey
for these causis that a grete disputacion was be fore my lorde
yn his chapell at Lambeth for pre(chyng of) Bysshoppis. And the
seide lordis that same Friday were there at diner. And the
Justise came not there that day; but the same Friday after mete
y was with the Justise by longe tyme and yn gode leisure to
comyne of oure mater. Y fynde hym a gode man and well willed yn
oure right, and like to have the grete rule of the mater, as yn
the other letter. And he bade me move of some gode meene to ende
the mater. Y seide ayen, savyng his commaundement, y cowde no
skyll theryn ne to speke ne move of menys, ne hit was not my
part so to do; for hit wolde seme if y so didde, that y hadde
doute of oure right, where y have right none, but we woll dwelle
and abide thereapoun and go no ferther; but if eny man wolde
move of eny meene, hit was my part to hire and so to reporte,
&c. But furthermore y seide that fro ij. thyngis w=t= oure gode
will we wolde never departe; that the churche and cimitere, as
that they calle synt Stevyn is fe, is parcel of the cite and
ever hath be and shall be; and that we have a vyw and alle that
to belongeth, and they right none, ne never hadde ne shall have
but
<P 10>
ever w=t= ynne the jurisdiccion and under the correccion and
punysshment of the cite, &c. He seide that they claymed a viw
and that they hadde used moche thyng, &c. and he seide hit was
aunsion demene. And y seide nay, and proved hit by Domesday, and
so were on grete argamentes by longe tyme, to longe to write:
all hit was to tempte me w=t= laghynge chere. Y seide they hadde
no more but sympell Court Baron, if they so hadde. He seide that
every man myght have of his awne tenantis and aske no man no
leve, &c. Y seide how sholde they have more; they have no olde
grauntis of kynges, ne clayme none allowance yn Eyere, ne
instrument to do punysshement of that that longethe to a lete.
He seide hit was a fe called of olde tyme. Y seide yee, as suche
fees as beth ther on towne, and reherced hym of vij. and that
alle were parcell of the cite: and among other y rehersed hym of
Seynt Nicholas fe. He seide lete the Bisshoppis fe be as Seynt
Nicholas fe is. Y seide, if hit pleased hym, nay, hit myght not
be so; for Seynt Nicholas fe, y called Haroldis fe, is graunt of
olde kyngis and confirmaciouns, &c. He seide the Bisshop hadde
the same. Y seide nay that I never knyw ne sigh, and if that
they so hadde, lete hit be shewed and but hit be answered hit
sholde ende the mater. Then he moved of divers menys and
abstynance of arestis. Y seide when the last grete debate was of
the suburbis w=t= oute Este yeate, of whiche debate he was cause
of an ende by a recompense, atte ende of whiche mater hit was
desired for to have an abstynance, but none y graunted but under
this fourme, that the Maier that tyme beyng, and every man that
hadde be Maier and like to be Maier, promysed on his feith to
forbere of arestis on the Churche for certyn ouris, alle that
they myght godely, and sithenes hadde they no cause resonable to
complaine; and y seide this was a grete thynge as me thoght. He
seide nay for that that sholde be attis tyme sholde be do by
writynge for a perpetual pees. Then he asked of me of this mene;
if we wolde absteyne us and forbere of arrestis of alle men of
habite servantis familiars knawed without any fraude generally.
Y seide, if hit
<P 11>
pleased hym, nay; for hit was better the last terme before this,
that we sholde forbere of arrestis but yn tyme of doyng of
divine servys of men of habite, servantis familiars and theire
Baillyffs knawed, &c. and of alle other as on Sent Paull is
Chirche at London. He seide hit was soth, and asked ayen if we
wold forbere and absteyne and be recompensed therfor, and we to
have the viw and alle that longeth therto generally, as well on
the fe as, &c. and so to make arrestis w=t= ynne the fe, as y
conceved hym, and to forbere alle other arrestis w=t= ynne his
tenementis of the seide fe and to be recompensed &c. and the
Bisshop to have his courtis of his awne tenantis and to holde
plees of gretter somme thenne [\+ten IN DRAFT\] Court Baron xl
s. and spake of xl. marke. Apon this mene he stiked faste, and
thoghte [\+toughte IN DRAFT\] hit was resonable and ever asked
of me divers tymes what y wolde seye therto, all as y conceve to
tempte me, and to concente to a mene, &c. and then y seide "My
lorde, if hit please you, ye shall have me exscused to answere,"
&c. for thogh me thoght that hit were a mene resonable y dar not
sey yee, thogh y have power, for the mater toucheth a grete
comminalte as well as me, and so that y dar not seye yn to tyme
that y have spoke w=t= my felowship at home: and y seide, "My
lorde, for as moche as y conceve right well that this mater, if
hit ende attis tyme, hit is like to ende by a mene, hit is my
part to hire and to reporte, &c. but be the mene never so
resonable to conclude with yow, thogh y have power ynogh, y
beseche yow of youre gode lordship to have me exscused therof yn
to tyme y have be at home with my felowship, or of tham here
with me vj. or vij. for other wyse woll y never conclude with my
gode will," &c. He seide ayen,"Ye didde theron as right a wise
man," and so departyd, &c. The morun Saterday y came to
Westminster to kepe my day as hit is aboveseid. Y spake with my
lorde Chaunceller. He adjorned hit over yn to Soneday, and
afterward fro Soneday yn to Moneday; for the Justises dyned with
the Maier of London that Sonday. The Moneday y maier,
<P 12>
Bluet, Hody, Dourissh, Germyn and Speere with me come to Lambeth
to my lord, and ther was at that day atte dyner with my lord the
ij. chif justises, and so we appered before them; and for oure
party advers Kys, Hengston, More, Wode and Wolston. My lord hym
self furst moved the mater to the Chif Justises, so that the
Chif Justise seide the mater stondeth thus: that as to the
compleyntis of the Bisshop Deane and Chapitre, hit is answered,
repplyed and rejoyned, and as moche do therynne as may be do;
and as tochynge the compleyntes of the maier and comminalte, the
whiche them semeth grevous, beth not yet answered, and them
semeth, &c. My lord Chauncellor therwith sodenly went right to
the justises bothen, and called to hym Nicholas Ayssheton at
that tyme beynge there, and leide theire iiij. heddis negh to
gedder and comyned to geder right privyly a grete while, and
alle as y conceve and as hit proved afterwardis that the
answeris to oure articulis not to be spoke of. After that my
lorde toke his cheire and the justises sate with hym, and bothe
parties with theire consell kneled before. My lord asked how we
last departed and therapoun stomped a grete while. My lord asked
the bokis. He seide that his were on Kent is warde. He asked of
oure party advers theire bokis: they wolde be knawe of none yn
no wyse. And y mayer, seide yes, with moche more therto, &c. and
how my lordis commaundement was at London, and aggrementis at
home yn the chaptry hous, that oure articulis sholde be answered
or we proceded any ferder, y praynge my lorde that so, &c. My
lord was loth therto and the justises bothe. My lorde seide
furste merily of Vaspasianus. And y seide that that was no mater
of oure compleyntis, but y putte yn to prive [\prove IN DRAFT\]
what the cite was of olde tyme; and then my lord seide some what
strangely and sharpely that oure articulis many were maters of
noyse and desclaunder, and forto answers them hit wolde be cause
of more
<P 13>
grucchynge and yvell wyll. And y seide, "Yf eny suche be, lete
tham be leide apart, and tho that beth substancialle grete and
grevous to us, and somme cause and begynnyng of alle this
debate, lete tham be so answered:" and y reherced iij. yn
especiall, oone of the Dyme, another of the feloun that toke the
bysshoppis fe, and afterwarde of the churche, and the coroners
ylette, &c. and of the toure on the bisshoppis gardyn, &c. The
chif justise seyde as tochynge the articulis of bothe parties,
that there were maters amendis to be made to ayther party, and
that were longe to do, and that hit myght be don as well after
as before, and that he hadde sey somme of oure articulis ij. in
especiall, oone of the Deme, another of the feloun aboveseide;
and seide that us semed that they were grevous to us. Whereapoun
my lord spake of the bokis to us ayen; and y seide that my bokis
were alle redy. And my lord bade to leye ham forth; and so we
didde the articulis. They were but litell y radde ne take kepe
to. Thenne as touchyng the deme, Hengston seide that he wolde
right well that the deme were payed with us, as hit aughte to
be, and hath be of olde tyme; but we didde not so, but sette hit
and called none of the bysshoppis tenantis to us. Y saide nay,
and made a longe rehersall therof fro kyng Edwardis tyme ynto
this dey, how and under what fourme hit was don of olde tyme,
how sithenes, and how now, and how late they sette with ynne
tham self, and kept the mony and yet kepeth, and that sholde be
well y proved. My lorde seide that as touchynge the settynge we
were alle most accordyd theryn. Then seide Hengston lightly as
touchynge settynge and kepyng of the mony of the deme, hit shall
be sone answered; he menyng of Upton is tyme y wote right well,
as y seide to yow at home. Y seyde to Hengston as lightly ayen,
"As sone hit sholde be repplied and truly with the grace of
god." Then my lord asked furste of that other party if they
hadde full auctorite and power and wolde consente to menys: and
they seide anone with
<P 14>
gode wille, yee for theire part. My lorde asked of me, Maier, if
we wolde the same. Y seide as touchyng the power we hadde
sufficiant and y nogh; as touchyng to menys, y bisoghte hym of
his lordship that y myght go apart to comyne with my felowship
and oure conseill there at that tyme; and so y didde, and yeaf
an answere. Hody hadde the wordis of power as above; and as
touchyng the menys with this condicion that oure articulis were
answered, that we wolde aggre to suche menys as they lordis
wolde rule us to. Then hit was no more at that tyme but the
articulis most be answered; and as loth as they were to answere,
and hadde no bokis as hit is abovesayde. Then they aggreed ham
to bryng yn the answere the morun. Y seide they hadde seide
dyvers tymes that they hadde olde charters, evidences, and
munymentis to ende the mater; and y seide if they so hadde to
bryng ham yn, and but they were answered to ende, &c. Hengston
seide moche and strongely because y seide they hadde suche
charters. Y seide yee, and avowed hit well they seide so. He
seide that they hadde olde recordis, &c. and y saide as above.
Hengston honged sore to have a lete and a grete courte, and y
traversed hym ever, and seide to hym moche thynge, and yn
especiall that they never hadde instrument, and reherced what
that belongeth to a lete. Hengston seide but litell therto, but
made wyse as thogh hit were yes; but Wode seide that they hadde
olde wrytinge to have hit, and spake no more at all that tyme.
Hengston seide openly that Radeford and he hadde communicacion
at home of this mater, and were well negh accorded; and my lord
seide, "Wolde god hit hadde be so," and yet "Wolde hit were so,
for oure discharge." Y, Mayer, seide y knywe well and was spoke
to of suche a communicacion; but what the privyte and the menyng
was y myghte not knowe, and yf y hadde hit sholde have be never
the werce but the better; and so we departed, stondyng a
<P 15>
fer fro my lorde, and he asked wyne and sende me his awne cuppe
and to no moo. Y wende right to my lord ayen before them alle,
and spake with my lorde prively a grete whiles of divers maters,
and among other of thys blynde entrety that Hengston spake of, y
seyynge to my lorde verily that this blynde entrety growith of
my lorde of Excetre as y supposed. Wherfor and for as moche as
Hengston seide yn his presence that Radeforde and he were negh
accorded: y bysoghte my lorde, as me thoght his part was, and to
ende the mater the rather to knowe of the communicacion, &c. My
lorde seide y moved hym right well and sholde have goddis
blessyng and his, and seide he wolde do so, &c. and so we toke
oure leve and departed fro my lord and my lordis alle. My lord
at this tyme didde me moche worsship, and openly yn the
communicacion aboveseyde commended me for my gode rule at home,
and yn especiall for the grete favo=r= that y have do to men of
the churche, hongyng this debate; and furthermore he of his awne
mocion yn the communicacion aboveseid spake openly of the letter
that he send home to the bysshop by me, seiyng these wordes,
"Maier, apon the communicacion that y hadde with yow here y send
home a letter by yow to my brother of Excetre, the whiche y
hoped sholde have do moche gode and cause of spede the rather
ende of the mater." Y seide, "My lorde, that is true, and y have
do my due diligent part therto, after youre commaundement by my
trauthe." Y seyde more to Kys these wordis, "Kis, ye seide to me
at home that y didde and seide moche thynge more there then my
lorddis commaundement was, sey ye here be fore my lorde what hit
was; and y truste to God and my lorde is gode lordship that my
lord will avowe me on alle thyng that y didde and seide." My
lorde sate stille a while, and Kys knelyng spake never a word,
and thus passed over. Hengston among the maters abovesayd seyde
moche more than is above writyn as touchyng the towre that stont
on the bysshoppis gardyn, seiyng that that towre stode upon the
bisshoppis grounde, and the bisshop
<P 16>
sum tyme hadde his prison yn that towre, and that we repaired
hit never, as is write on oure articulis: atte last hit was
seide by their party that parcell of the towre stode upon the
bisshoppis grounde as hit appereth openly there; they menyng by
a wall and kernellis stondynge withoute the towre and thiknys of
the towne walle, toward the bisshoppis gardyn and annexed to the
towre and towne wallis, &c.
   The morun tuysday al Halwyn yeven y receyved the answeris to
oure articulis at Westminster of the whiche y sende yow a true
copy, yn the whiche articulis as hit appereth they have spatte
out the uttmyst and worste venym that they cowde seye or thynke
by me; y blessed be God hit is nother felony, ne treson, ne
grete trespas, and thogh hit hadde be, so they wolde have don,
and werce yf they cowde: but as for trawthe of the mater that
tocheth me, meny worthy man stondeth on the same cas and have do
moche werce than ever y didde, thogh that be to me none exscuse.
As touchyng the grete venym that they menyth of my lyvyng, y may
and purpose be at my purge, as y may right well apon my sawle of
alle wymmen alyve excepte oone, and of hire righte a grete
while; therfor y take right noght by and sey sadly (\si recte
vivas\) , &.c. and am right mery and fare right well, ever
thankyng God and myn awne purse. And y liyng on my bedde atte
writyng of this right yerly, myryly syngyng a myry song, and
that ys this, Come no more at oure hous, come, come, come. Y
woll not dye nor for sorowe ne for anger, but be myry and fare
right well, while y have mony; but that ys and like to be scarce
with me, considerynge the bisynesse and coste that y have hadde:
and like to have: and yet y hadde with me xx li. and more by my
trauthe; wherof of trauthe not right moche y spende yet, but
like &c. Constre ye what ye will. Item, Thomas Montagew sholde
sende me xj li. and odde mony as he wote well and can telle
yowe: and y supposed that John Germyn sholde [\ORIGINALLY
wolde\] have broght to me all most x li. all this of myne awne
gode; wherof
<P 17>
cometh to me no peny. Wherfor y sende home to yow attis tyme
William Hampton, berer of this writyng, for this cause most
specially that ye, how that ever ye do, sende me xx li. yn hast,
as ye wolle the spede of youre mater and welfare of the cite, y
not shamed but pleased attis tyme; and that ye faill yn no wyse,
mervaillyng moche, for as moche as y departed fro yow with oute
eny mony of youris, that ye ne hadde sende to me sithenesse some
mony by Germyn, Kyrton, or some other man, &c.
   Forthermore as tochyng the seide answeris, y pray yow that
they be well redely avysely and distinctely over radde and the
substance of them right well understonde, and most speciall the
furste articule, the whiche ys most and right harde to answere,
and that oure Recorder have knoweliche of all thyng that y have
write home yf he be here as y suppose attis tyme, and but yf he
be, to sende home to hym in hast; so that y have youre conceyt
witte and entente to repplye to the seide answeris, and to the
furste most specyally, whiche is derke to my conceyte as yet;
but y truste to God hit shall be right well with youre gode
enformacion and helpe therto: to whiche entent y sende yow a
rolle yn the whiche is conteyned copies of Domus Dey, copy of
Eyris, of charters and other thynges that is necessary to be
seye yn makyng of thes repplicacions. Y can no more attis tyme,
but y pray you to be not wery to over rede hire and se all the
writyng that y have sende home to yow attis tyme; and yf ye be,
no mervaill thogh y be wery, &c. and God be w=t= yow. y-writen
at London yn alle Sawlyn day afore day yn hast. Item, y pray you
to sende me the blak rolle whiche shall be delyvered to yow by
Thomas Montegow, by William Hampton berer of this writyng, the
which is a man true ynogh as y truste and suppose and hath
borwys for his office, lete them be pryvy to, yf yow, that hit
is to be do.

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 18>
[} [\V. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS. LONDON, SAT. 11 NOV. 1447.
DRAFT LETTER.\] }]
   I grete you well alle, doyng yow to understonde that y am at
London as y have write to yow afore this tyme, &c. and as
touchyng the laboure and spede of oure comyn mater sithen y
wrote last to yow, y was at Lambeth with my lorde on Sonday next
after alle Halwyn day and spake with hym at gode leisure and yn
gode tyme and well disposed. Among other thynges y asked [{...{]
at dey and how we sholde be demened to brynge yn oure
repplicacions, he seyde "Come the morun Monedey [{...{] the love
of god," Y seyde the tyme was to shorte, and prayed hym of
Wendysdey; y enfourmed hym [{of t{]he grete malice venym that
they have spatte to me yn theire answeris as hit appereth yn a
copy that y sende to yow of. My lorde seide, "Alagge alagge, why
wolde they do so? y woll seye right sharpely to ham therfor and
y nogh," and commaunded me to bryng the answeris to hym the
morun at Westminster, and that he wolde amende hit w=t= his awne
hondis, &c. and so y departed, and mette w=t= hym that morun yn
the escheco=r= chamber, and as sone as ever he saw me a ferre,
he called me to hym and asked the seide answere, and he rased
hit as hit plesed hym w=t= his owne handys, oure party advers
w=t= theire counsell beyng present and yvell plesed and payde
therwith, and my lorde was to tham right sadde ne wolde hire ham
speke no worde, but spake to the chif Justyse Fortescu and
prayed hym to be w=t= hym that morun atte mete to comyne of oure
mater, and yeaf no dey to that other
<P 19>
party ne to me to be there and so departed. The morun tuysdey y
came to my lorde at Westminster ayen and asked yf he wolde
commaunde me eny thyng to do that dey, he seide yee, to be w=t=
hym that after mete to comyne as hit is aboveseide. Y seide, "My
lorde oure repplicacions beth not yet alle redy ne mygh not be
for shortenesse of tyme thogh y sholde dye therfor, and yet y
hadde waked nyghte and dey." He seide hit was right yvell y do
yf hit myght otherwise have be, and commaunded me not fealle but
kepe my dey, that after mete: and so y didde and with me
Dourissh and Speare, and for that other party Kys, Hengston,
More, Wode, and Orcharde, a greet barre. Furste my lorde asked
how we departed laste. Hit was seyde apoune the answerys of the
Bysshop, Deane, and Chapitre, put yn and we to replye. Y seyde,
"My lorde, oure repplicacions beth not yet fully redy bot anon
to oon and that oon almost as hit appereth here aredy to shewe."
My lorde and the Justyse seyde no force to shewe and ryght meny
resons why. Y seyde yes, and made resons sympelly as y cowde; so
hit was graunted that y sholde bryng ham yn, &c. My lorde seyde
that he wolde sende for the bokys that y have write to yow of yn
Kent ys warde: then he bade that other party goo a part and
comyned w=t= my seyde felowship and me nigh by an oure, and he
was right mery and comyned meny dyvers maters bothe of disporte
and sadnesse: furste of dysporte of Bysshop Stafford ys tyme
when my lord was there, and among other y spake to my lorde yn
dysporte of the arest of S=r= Thomas Gogh and of Hugh Luccays
atte Denys place, and what favo=r= y had do and had no thanke
and of other thyngys as come yn to my mynde. He cowde telle us
how Germyn toke the churche +te day of eleccion, &c. Y seide
[{...{] therof a disporte, and that Germyn putte his fynger yn
his ye and wepte, also y t [{...{]e most sadly wyse. Atte last
fyll to mater of sadnesse, and they spake of Goddys hous Seynt
Peter ys churche of Excetre, and my lorde spake of his house,
his halle, and the Justyse the same, how
<P 20>
loth they wolde be to make arestys theryn, and seyde that seynt
Peter ys churche was Goddis hous and his halle, &c. and made
meny resons to bryng yn abstynce of arestys. They were answered
as God wolde geve us grace. Douryssh didde well his part;
nerthelez all the longage bot hit were the lesse was by twene my
lorde Chaunceller the Justyse and me. My lorde Chaunceller wolde
that y sholde myve of menys. Y seyde, savyng his commaundement,
that y cowde not theryn; hit was not my part: and then he hym
self and the Justyse moved of menys dyvers, and atte the laste
my lorde moved of this mene to forbere arestys of alle men of
habyte and theyre servantys, famylyars, and bailliffs, withynne
the churche and cimetere at alle tymes, &c. Douryssh acquytted
hym well, and leyde meny myschyffys, &c. Y seyde therto also as
y cowde sympelly, and then y reherced to hym of the last accorde
of the suberbys withoute Esteyeate and what abstynance was of
courtesy y graunted at that tyme, &c. y conceyved that my lorde
wolde move of no nyre mene and then y seyde to hym thus: "My
lorde, y beseke you of youre gode lordship to have me exscu
[{...{] to move or aggre to eny mene [{...{] y have speke with
my felowship at home or they here with me." Tham thoghte y seyde
reso [{...{] hadde right moche longage of the Bysshoppis fe, and
specyally of the vyw and of the Bysshoppis Court what court he
hadde and sholde have: here of was right moche longage and reson
prove and contra. Y hilde myn awne. Y hadde maters y nogh, &c.
My seyde lordys bothe seyde that thay hadde olde recordys and
evydences to prove their content. My lord hym self spake derkely
of right olde charters the whiche y as ever have supposed right
well; so y said, "My lorde, y have hurde of suche thyngis, bot y
sawe hit never, praying yow yf eny suche thyng be, that they may
be shewed and seyn, and bot yf hit maybe answered ellys so to
make an ende," &c. My lorde conjoured me to make an ende of this
mater and yf y so didde y sholde be cronycled. Y seyde, "My
lorde, y have don my
<P 21>
part as y truste to God ye shall knawe and wolle reporte as fer
as y can may and thar do after youre commaundement." Y conjoured
my lorde ayen and seyde these wordys, "My lorde, ye beth lorde
under hevyn, excepte the kyng, that the Cite of Excetre have
most feyth hope and truste theryn, and have fulle power to make
an ende, bysekyng you and as y dar requyre yow, se the ryght and
lete hit never passe yo=r= hondes bot so to make an ende," and
made us go a part and called that other party. They were with
hym bote ryght a litell while and called us yn ayen, and bade
that other go apart, and seyde to us that they hadde comyned
wyth that other party, and they seyn moche that they woll abyde
apoun theire right, and shewe theire forseyde evydence to prove
hit. Y seyde, "My lorde," as y have aboveseyde, &c. My lorde
seyde, "Mayer, ye seye right well, and so we woll do and
precede," and so we all departed (\sine die\) , &c. Bot sythenys
y have be w=t= my lorde dyvers tymes and now have a day, and
that other party to be before my seide lordis the morun Sonedey
apon the makyng of this letter; they to shewe ther evydences as
y suppose. What they meneth that they woll abyde apon theire
right and shew theire evydence constre ye. Gode and gentell
longage and shere y have of that other party, and that they will
abyde the rule of the lordys, &c. and that the lordys purpose to
make an ende, &c. bote y fere therof bot the courte be so hard
against us, therfor to speke wyth the nywe shyrf y sette hit
grete wysedome so hit be by soche a mene as be knowe noght fro
us for drede. Certe hit be seyde that that ys the cause of the
breche, &c. for they have labored strongly and sayeth nay, &c.

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 22>
[} [\VI. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS. LONDON ?NOV. OR DEC. 1447.
DRAFT LETTER.\] }]
Worthy siris y grete yow well alle; doyng you to understonde as
touchyng the laboure and spede of oure mater that Dourissh and
Speere hadde be w=t= my lord on Soneday next before my comyng
and hadde ther right gode chere of my lord and other and right
[{...{] so spedde there yn the beste wyse at +t=t= tyme as the
mater stondeth, and yn especyall as tochyng the commaundement
the whiche y reported at home, nywe bondis to be made and
enseled at home to entrete yn to Candel masse and lenger yf +te
parties myght so accorde to breve the mater to the lordis
hondis; and that we myght not accorde therof to be remytted to
the lordes and they so to make an ende; of the whiche
commaundement my lorde remembred hym right well therof as well
as the Chif Justise, and my lord avowed me well therof and was
right well pleased of all my laboure at home y-reported to hym
by Thomas Dourissh and Speere yn the beste wyse, my lorde seyng
of me that y was never worthy to be called, that y was a godeman
wyse and well do my part, after his commaundement attis tyme and
shold have goddes blessyng and his, and whan that ever y come to
be well come to hym, as the seide Dourissh and Speere reported
to me; and also they spake to hym of a sute like to be take by
+te B. D. and C. &c. My lord answered bot litell therto at that
tyme, bot bade ham to awayte apoun hym that morun at Westminster
and so departed. Ayenst whiche tyme the seide Dourissh and
Speere right wysely ordeyned counsell Yong
<P 23>
and Beef, and so came yn before my lord Chaunceller the morun
Moneday, and nywe moved hym w=t= moche longage as tochyng the
sute aboveseide. My lorde seyde he myght not werne tham +te
comyn lawe, bot he seide right feith fully and sadly he wolde
consell ham the contrary and commaunded to awayte apon hym and
+te Chif Justise beyng togeder. A rule to be sette, &c. And so
departed and stont yet.
   Furthermore y do you to understonde y come to London on
tuysdey, so +tt y wolde have be w=t= my lord +tt same dey tymely
y nogh afore mete; bot I taried and yet tary because of +te buk
horn +tt was boght or y went and forth before at Stoklond or y
departed fro home as Germyn, that never legh, tolde to me verily
w=t= grete othis; the whiche came not yet, me to right grete
anger and discomfort by my trauthe, and the cause +t=t= hit was
boght for myche like to be lost; for hit hadde be a gode mene
and order after spekyng and communication aboveseid, the buk
horn to have be presented, and y to have come there after, &c.
and so to have sped moche the better: but now hit is like to
faille to hyndryng. And so y have helpe ynogh abakward and but a
litell forthward as hit at alle tyme proveth and appereth. Y
pray you specially to thanke moche t[{...{] gentill Germyn
(\Quasi duceret euge euge\) (^Germyn^) of his governaunce attis
tyme, (\id male gaude\) Germyn. Nothelez [\I know\] right well
he woll ascuse hym right well by thike fals harlot his carioure,
and the carioure yn like wyse by the seide Germyn, and so I may
say (\ait latro ad latronem\) and (\inter scabella duo anus
labitur humo\) . Cristes curse have they bothe, and seye ye amen
(\non sine merito\) , and bot ye dar sey so, thynke so, thynke
so. Also y charge Germyn under rule and commaundement of J.
Coteler my lutenant, +t=t= he do that he can do, braule, bragge
and brace, lye and swere well to, and yn especiall +t=t= +te
stretes be right clene and specialle the litell lane yn the bak
side be nethe the flessh folde yeate, for ther lieth many oxen
hedes and bonys that they be removed away for the nonys ayenst
my comyng as sone as y may by cokkis bonys.

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 24>
[} [\VII. SHILLINGFORD TO ONE OF THE BISHOP'S COUNSEL. 14 DEC.
1447. DRAFT LETTER.\] }]
   Right worshipfull sir, y recommaunde me to yow. Like yow to
be remembred of the speche and communicacion +tt was late
betwene yow and me at Westminster before my lorde Chif Justise
and also what he seide and how that y conjured yow and ye
conjured me ayen, and alle to the best entent to alle parties as
y hope to God, trustyng that ye buth and woll be the same man as
there, or better yf ye better may, and y the same after my
sympell power by my trauthe: apon the whiche communicacion as y
seide to yow that y wolde, and as ye seide my part was to spake
with my lord Chaunceller, &c. and afterward Maister Rogger Kys
and y were before my two seid lordis to knowe of a rule and a
departyng home, &c. Whas rule and commaundement as y conceved
was this, to make and ensele nywe bondis yn to Candelmasse next
comyng, and lenger yf the parties wolde at oure comyng home; and
yn the mene tyme to entrete at home to shorte the mater to their
hondes; and that we myght not accorde therof, they to make an
ende, the whiche hath ever be my will and laboure y take God to
wytnesse, and yet shall be. Wherapon y consideryng the rule and
commaundement of the lordes and the entent of +te communicacion
betwene yow and me abovesaide, y sende to yow at this tyme
praying yow to considre the same, with more that hit is bot a
short and a bysy tyme consyderyng the grete parties and maters,
with the circumstance and grete and longe communicacion that is
like to be. Wherfor y pray yow to prefixe place day and tyme as
ye woll resonabilly, and that as sone as ye may godely, the
rather the levere, and ye shall be all redy and wyth alle
<P 25>
thoo that longeth to be there, for oure party un failled; so
that noo cause of tarying shallbe founde yn oure party with the
grace of God: praying yow the same, &c. for ye may fully conceve
+tt my felows and y wold fayne have a gode ende and pees, prayng
you to applie yo=r= god will and favo=r= to the same. And how
hit may please you to do in +t=s=, y pray you to s[{ende{] hit
me yn writyng and alle shall be well w=t= +t=e= grace of God,
whiche have yow yn kepyng. Amen. Writen at Exeter the thursday
(next) after Sent Lucie.

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 25>
[} [\VIII. SHILLINGFORD TO DOWRISH. EXETER, WEDNESDAY, EVE OF
ST. THOMAS THE APOSTLE, DEC. 20, 1447.\] }]
   Right Worshipfull ser, y recommaunde me un to yow; doyng yow
to understonde that as touchyng the grete maters yn debate by
twene my lord the Bysshop of Excetre the Deane and the Chapiter
ther, and the Maier and Comminalte of the seide Cite, the whiche
maters at London this last term passed, by comaundement of the
lordis ys put yn rule as hit appereth by a letter the whiche y
have sende to William Hengston, wherof y sende to yow a copy; as
well as of dyvers other bullis of supplicacions by the seide
Maier and
<P 26>
Comminalte y putte yn be fore the seide lordis. The whiche
copies all y pray yow avysely to over rede and well understonde
after the commaundement and rule aboveseide. And after the gode
will, prayer, fourme, effecte, desire, and entent of the seide
Maier and Comminalte comprehended yn the seide letter and
bullis, to applie your gode will and to do your tendre and
diligent labour to helpe to make a gode ende, and that all my
feloship and y pray yow right hertly. And yn especyall that ye
be oon of thoo pryncipall endifferently to entrete ther ynne
that most gode may do ther yn, and with yow Radeforde and
Hengston, and so that William Beef be oon with yow by your
speciall meene to be brogh yn, for pleasur and the better to
ende the mater hardly with the grace of God. Ye may constre
moche thyng &c. bot this aboveseide thus don, y dowte noght, bot
truste to God verily to have a gode ende and pees with the grace
of God, whiche have yow ynh is kepyng. Amen. Writen at Excetre
on Wendisdey yn the vigill of Seynt Thomas the Apostell.

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 26>
[} [\IX. SHILLINGFORD TO THE BISHOP. EXETER, 24 DEC. 1447. DRAFT
LETTER.\] }]
   Right Worshipfull and Reverend Fader yn God and gode lorde, y
recommaunde me un to your right gode and gracyous lordship.
Please hit your gode and gracious lordship to have yn knowliche
<P 27>
as tochyng the grete maters yn variance betwene yo=r= right gode
and gracious lordship the Deane and Chapiter of yo=r= Cathedrall
Churche of the Cite of Exceter and the Maier and the Comminalte
of the seide Cite, the which maters by yo=r= menys so labored un
to the highnesse of our soverayn lorde the Kyng was broght yn
and so by longe tyme hath honged and yet hongeth yn compremys be
fore the lordis. The whiche by the seide lordis this last terme
as y conceyved thus ruled, and commaunded nywe bondis to be made
and enseled to entrete yn to Candelmasse and lenger yf the
parties myght so aggre and accorde at their comyng home; and yn
the mene tyme to entrete at home to shorte the mater to their
hondis, and that we myght not accorde therof they to make an
ende; and that by longe tyme hath be my lorde Chauncelleris
commaundement as y knawe right well, and as hit proveth and
appereth by a letter by hym late to yow sende, the whiche letter
he this terme avowed well for myn excuse your conseill beyng
present, and as y seid yn yo=r= presence yn the Chapetry hous of
yo=r= Cathedrall Churche of Excetre. The whiche rule and
commaundement the seid Maier and Comminalte fully aggreed ham
for their part and were all redy to fulfille hit at London and
so buth yet her at home, and shall be yn all wyse, or eny other
resonable entrety that may be moved or stured or by yow
commaunded, so hit be knowed to the pleasure of my seid lords
aboveseid, praying yow and yo=r= parties and yow most specially
of your gode and gracious lordship to yeve your gode will and
applie yo=r= favo=r= to conforme to the same; considryng verily
that we wold right fayne have a gode ende with yow as lawe,
right, reson, and gode consience requiren, with all favo=r=
desired resonable that by our part may be shewed or don, and to
that is called your fe, most specially bysekyng yo=r= gode and
gracious lordship to be amytted therto, for hit was never our
will to putte that yn debate ne to despute the right therof, but
as we have be forced therto by yo=r= Articulis of Complayntes
and other actes of the same, or elles to lese our rig[\ht\] ,
&c. Also hit was never known ne seide bot that the seide fe was
a thyng by him self, and the seide Churche and Cimitere
<P 28>
another thyng by him self, as ye have supposed and claymed and
allegged by two the furst divers articulis therof made yn your
furst articulis of compleynts, withoute that yo=r= Cathedrall
Churche and Cimitere be parcell of the seid fe or annexed
therto, as hit is and shall be well proved by evident writyng,
witnesse, and other wyse. But now late this last terme ye have
supposed and leyde the seid fee Churche and Cimitere to be
conjoyntly contrary to yo=r= furst clayme, as hit openly
appereth yn your furst articulis of yo=r= provys to have a
colo=r= to the seide Churche and Cimitere by the seide fe, &c.,
as hit is right well conceyved, and therto ye have aleyed for
yo=r= prove the boke of domysdey, the whiche is no prove, and
that we have and shall comytte yn to the grete wysedomys of the
lords abovseid. But we truste to God, savyng yo=r= gode
lordshippe, the same boke shall prove our entent as hit is
proved and pleynly appereth yn our furst answer to the seide
same articule of y=r= provys. The whiche with meny other thyngs
shall be redy to be shewed before yo=r= gode lordships yf hit
please you. But what conclusion that ever ther folwe we trustyng
to God to have yo=r= gode lordship, we woll be demened
resonabilly with all favo=r= to the pleasur of your gode
lordship as hit is aboveseid, and of the seid fe most specially,
ever besekyng you and as we dar requyr you that ye woll applie
yo=r= blessed favo=r= and benyvolence to the gode ende and
appeasynge of this mater, after the will, desir, forme, effecte
and entente of dyvers bullis of supplicacons by us y put and to
be put yn be fore the lordes of this mater, of the whiche bullis
I sende to you copies by the berers of this my pore writyng,
whiche copies please hit yo=r= gode and gracious lordship at
yo=r= leysure to over se and fully conceyve, the rather to have
a gode ende as we truste to God: and like you to knowe that y
have write to Copleston and Hengeston and y spoke with Radeford
of this maters for myn exscuse to be reported above be fore the
lords, so that no cause of taryng shall be founde yn our party,
but ever all redye, &c. Bysekyng you of yo=r= right gode and
gracious lordship, as y have my lord Chaunceller, to have me
exscused of myn non comyng to you
<P 29>
as my dute hath be and is. Considryng verily if y myght knowe
[{...{] lordships pleasur and commaundement therto, the whiche y
wolde full fayne knowe and come grete joye and comfort to alle
your puple and gostly children of the Cite of Exceter and me
most specially; and how hit may please your gode lordeship to do
and commaunde us yn the rule and commaundement of the lords
aboveseide to have yn knowliche by the berers of this my symple
writyng at yo=r= pleasur. Please yo=r= gode and gracious
lordship to have yn rembrance that I and all the Comminalte of
the seide Cite ben your gostly children and yo=r= men at yo=r=
commaundement and ever shall be by Godd's mercy, whiche preserve
yo=r= gode and gracious lordship and yo=r= blessed faderhed yn
his high mercy. Writen at Exceter the xxiiii day of Decembre.
   By yo=r= awne servant and bedman,
   J. Shillyngford.

<Q SHI 1447 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 29>
[} [\X. INSTRUCTIONS FROM SHILLINGFORD TO HIS DEPUTY. 24 DEC.,
1447.\] }]
   After the recommendacion had yn the most godely wyse, ye
shall seye to my lord that the Maier yeveth yow yn commaundement
to seye, that my lorde Chaunceller greteth hym well and sendeth
hym the letter, bysekyng hym of his gode lordship avisely to
overse hit: wherapon as ye suppose after the entent of the
letter that ye most speke myche more with him, also bysekyng him
of his gode lordship
<P 30>
atte reverence of my lorde Chaunceller to yeve leyser and
attendence therto; seyyng also that hit is the Maier is part to
have come hym self with the letter and exscuse, &c., and then
how dangerous hit was to make eny worthy man to come to hym att
tyme for strange chere at Clist, &c., and that the Maier
exscused hym ayenst my seide lorde Chaunceller to brynge the
letter, &c., and promytted to sende of the most worthiest as he
hath, &c.
   Item, that ye commende my lorde Chaunceller yn the most beste
and trusty wyse, and that hit is his commaundement and other
lordes, and longe tyme hath be, that we sholde entrete at home,
the whiche hath be the Maier is grete laboure the grete part of
all this yere, and myghte noght be excepted therto, and so he
hath reported before the lordes as well as the furst coming to
hym to Clist to seke his gode lordeship and pees for his
exscuse: and yet the Mayer and the Cite now aswell as before
this tyme by commaundement of the lordis and by their awne gode
wyll prayeth and desireth that the matter myght be disclosed
before his gode lordship, the Maier, the Recorder with other of
the Cite at his pleser beyng present, trustyng to God verely al
for the best, and myche the rather and the better to have a gode
ende as lawe, reson, and right gode conscience requyren, he to
fele alle the maters, and so as ye suppose to be his awne juge,
and ende myche of the maters by his awne conscience, we knawing
his blessednysse and gode conscience, &c. Forthermore, ye shall
seye as for the Maier wher my seyde lorde hath seide, and sende
hym word that he is not the man that he wend that he had be, the
which worde is to hym right hevy, and seith that he shall fynde
hym the same oo man and same true man as he hath be, and so he
trusteth to God he is take and knawe among the lordes above; but
thogh he and other labor for the right of the Cite w=t= true
menys as he hath do and none otherwise as hit shalbe well
proved, hit is no cause, &c., they beth sworn therto as he is to
the right of his benefice. Make ye myche of this matter and of
the deme suying, and of the short chere at Cliste, and the gode
chere that the Maier had yn his Closet, bryngyng Coteler
<P 31>
to his gode grace, y yet praying the same yf y may be herde, and
that ye desyre his gode leysur now, and but yf ye mowe now to
come to hym ayen.

<Q SHI 1447 HWEBBER>
<A H. WEBBER>
<G M>
<P 33>
[} [\XII. H. WEBBER, PRIEST, ON BEHALF OF THE BISHOP, TO THE
RECORDER (?). CHUDLEGH, 28 DEC. 1447.\] }]
   My right reverend trusty and singular maister, after dewe and
entierly recommendacion with all worship and reverence, my lord
the Bysshop of Excetre, of whas commaundement y write un to you
at this tyme, thanketh your kyndenesse of your gode and well
conceyved letter that ye sende unto hym on Sonday last passed,
the whiche day sone apon that he receyved your letter he
receyved a long and right a diffuse letter y send to hym by the
Mayer of Excetre remyttyng my seide lord in the same yn to a
long rolle of supplicacions by hym made ther a fore, yn the
whiche letters ye as yn youre by the enformacion of the seyde
Mayer, and the seide Mayer as yn his letters conceyved, atte
laste terme that hit was appoynted by my lord of Canterbury and
the two Chyf Justises, that the maters be twene my seide lord
and the Deane and the Chapitre of his Churche of Excetre and the
seyde Maier and the Comminalte of the said Cite hongyng sholde
be entreted here at home yn this vacacon, with other larger
words of the same in the Mayer's letters comprehended. Trewly,
S=r=, what the departyng and how at the laste terme was a fore
my seid lord the Chaunceller and the seide Justises my seide
lorde was a fore and is fully enfourmed therof. Notheles for as
moche as ye fynde the seide Maier and his feloship of the Cite
disiderable and aggreyng a communicacion to be hadde after the
effecte that ye commyned with my seid lord sum
<P 34>
tyme at Excetre, and yn maner so the seide Maier writeth hym
self to my seid lord, with maters of pretens contrarye articulis
and other allegauncies and remissions yn to meny diffuse
supplicacions, seyng furdermore that he hath writen to John
Copleston and William Hendiston for the same communicacion to be
hadde for the gode ende and peasyng of the seide maters, of the
whiche my seide lorde seith that hit pleaseth hym that a
communicacion myght be hadde yn haste, and he woll do the seide
John Copleston and William Hendeston to be at Excetre with other
as well of the Chapitre is counseill as of his awne atte next
session of peas. So that the seide communicacion be no longe
delaye to hyndryng of his Churche and of his right, for trewly
he woll noo long delayes theron, bot to do his avail whan he
shall se his tyme. And yf hit so be that ther shall be y-offered
suche weyes that may be to the gode ende and peasying of the
seide maters withoute hertyng and delayng of the right of his
Churche, he woll applie hym self therto with gode will: and
where ye wrote yn to my seide lorde that he moved to yow that
William Hendeston and ye a certyn day limited by yow and by my
seid lord for to commune for the gode ende to be hadde yn the
seide maters, and he kepte not his day, my seid lord seith that
ye knowe well by certefyyng of right worthy men that he myght
not be there at that day for certyn causes that they certefied
yow therof resonable. Notheles sone apon he came to yow and ye
and he communed to geder, the whiche communicacion was be case
and litell fruite theron. And he seith that sith he came home
from Courte he communed with yow of dyvers maters, bot ye moved
noo thyng of the seide maters. And therfor my seide lord
supposed ye wolde noo more therof. Notheles my seide lord, seyng
your gode will, whiche ben of counseill with his Churche, wyth
hym, and with the Maier of later date, thanketh yow hertely of
your gode letter and also the Maier for his godeley letters, and
with the grace of God John a Copleston and William Hendeston and
other, as hit is aboveseid [^IN THE EDITION TWO DOTS ABOVE THE O
IN aboveseid^] , shall be a redy to commune with yow under the
<P 35>
fourme as hit is aboveseid to the effectuall gode ende with oute
grete delay, for trewly y ther sey yow secretely, on grete
truste that y have founde yn your person ever, my seid lord woll
not be long delayed yn noowise, as y veryly conceyve by hym, and
therfor y wolde for the reverence of God and ease of the pore
puple and for your grete worship that ye myght be cause of the
gode ende and peasyng of the seide maters. And yf y myght se
that hit myght take effectuall and a spedefull ende, y sey yow
feithfully y shall do my part truly therto with the grace of
God, the which have yow ever yn his gracyous kepyng, and my seid
lord praied yow that ye wolle notise his wyll aboveseid to the
seid Maier and to such other as your worthy and appreved
discrecion semyth best for be don. Y-write at Chuddelegh the
xxviii day of December.
   By your owne Prest,
   H. Webber,
   dwellyng with the Bysshop of Excetr.

<Q SHI 1448 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 35>
[} [\XIII. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS. LONDON, 2 FEB. 1447-8.
DRAFT LETTER.\] }]
   Right worthy siris, y grete yow well; doyng yow to
understonde that on Candlemasse yeve y receyved a letter y send
to me by Harry Dobyn, whiche letter yn my sympell conceyt y yn
alle thynges have well understonde, and y am and was before that
letter fully remembred of all thynges that is comprehended
theryn, as specially of Stokewode, as well as more of the
entrety some tyme moved by Sir William Bonevill, and of the
communycacion ther
<P 36>
upon hadde at London, and specially yn the Cloyster at Paulys,
the right grete of the parties, with theire conseille, and moche
other puple beyng present; what was comyned, moved, stured,
desired, and by whom; how hit was procured and shortly throwen
of; how hit was conceyved, reported, and take there and ellis
where, and what yvell wyll, waywardnys, and unkyndnesse was
assigned, and what was promysed and what was do therfore, ye
knowe right well, and Richard Druell specially: some wherof ye
and y commyned therof the last hole day of my beyng at home at
Exceter yn my parler; constre ye alle thynges what y mene. What
is to do furthermore y can not yet be redely avysed by conseill,
bot y most doe as y se the mater woll be ruled, and as y can,
may, and dar do, eschewyng variance, breche, throwyng of, and
yndyngnacion specially, and so y shall by the grace of God,
whiche have yow yn his kepyng. Amen.

<Q SHI 1448 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 36>
[} [\XIV. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS. 3 FEB. 1447-8. ORIGINAL
AND DRAFT. THE WORDS IN BRACKETS ARE FILLED IN FROM THE DRAFT.\]
}]
   (Worthy siris, y grete) yow well alle, doyng yow to
understonde that the bukhorn came to me bot on Candelmasse yeven
(afternone somewh)at better late than never, whiche bukhorn was
presented to my lord on Candelmasse day by the (morun. How hit)
was presented y-take, and what thankys and better thankis y nogh
therfor Harry Dobyn can telle (yow of some)what by mowthe. That
day was y
<P 37>
at Lambeth with my lorde at masse, and offered my candelle (to
my lord is) blessed hond, y knelyng adoun offeryng my candell.
My lord with laghyng chere upon me seide hertely, "Graunt mercy,
Mayer," &c. That same day y abode there to mete by my seide
lordis commaundement; (y mette) with my lorde atte high table
ende comyng to meteward, and as sone as ever he saw me he (toke
me) fast by the honde and thankis ynogh to: y seide to my seid
lorde hit was to symple a thyng considryng his astate to seye
onys graunt mercy, bot yf y hadde be at home at this faire he
sholde have had better stuf and other thynges, &c. Y went forth
with hym to the myddis of the halle, he stondyng yn his astate
ayenst the fire a grete whiles, and ij bisshoppis, the ij Chif
Justises, and other lordis, knyghtes, and squyers, and other
comyn puple grete multitude, the halle fulle, alle stondyng a
far apart fro hym, y knelyng by hym, and after recommendacion y
moved hym of oure mater shortly as tyme asked, and yn especiall
of the ij Chif Justises beyng there, bysekyng hym or their
departyng to calle ham to hym for oure mater; he seid hertly
with right godewill, and prayed God that ther myght be right a
gode ende; and y thanked hym and seide with his gode lordship we
were almost thurgh and at an ende, y seyyng also by these menys
"My lord, y have herd yow seye that ye and the ij Chif Justises
of a rule of the Churche and Cimitere were negh accorded." He
seide hertely, "Yee for gode." Y seide, "My lord, as touchyng
the fee Radford and Coplestone beth nigh accorded at home,
whiche two accordis y knowe we buth alle most thurgh:" the
whiche seyyng alle he toke on the best wyse and was well pleased
therwith, and so departed fro hym at that tyme. Mete y doun, my
lord toke his chamber, the astatis and other with hym. Y put me
yn presse and to my lorde and spake with hym right a grete
while, so that he called the Justises to hym and moved of oure
mater. Y wolde have seide, &c. the Chif Justise toke upon hym to
seye, &c. and seide moche thyng for oure part, and quytte hym a
gode man to us.
<P 38>
Furst he reherced how we were broght yn be fore tham by the
Kynges commaundement, how we wolde have be dysmyssed and
discharged fro tham, and be atte comyn lawe and myght not, and
how hit hath be labored ayenst us duryng the tyme of this
entrety, so that ther is a Shirf y made and the contrey embraced
ayenst (oure) entent and thus we stode at myschif, &c. The other
Chif Justise seide well therto also, and my lord toke hit
(welle) seyyng, "Hit may not be so; assigne ye a tyme the
parties to be called, a rule to be sette, so that hit shold be
amendyd:" and so departed as for more communicacion of oure
mater. Afterward y spake with the ij=de= Chif Justise there a
grete while, to whom oure mater myche was rawe. He understode
and toke my seyyng and ynformacion (yn the moste) beste wise,
and so seid therto for oure part. (After this we toke our leve,
and y yn my leve takyng seyyng (these) wordis, "My lord, have
mercy and pyty apoun that pore Cite, Jesus (\vidit civitatem et
flevit super eam\) ;" also bysekyng him to yeve me leve to sywe
to his gode lordship to have the mater refourmed as hit is
aboveseide; he seide y sholde be right welle come what tyme that
ever y come, and so departed thens and stonde this day, &c. That
nyght right late Harry (Brok) broght me a copy of a recorde
whiche y sende to yow, to the whiche recorde with avys of
conseill y thyng bolde(ly to) appere forthwith this terme, &c.
and y hope hit shall be right well as the cas stoondeth, and
better than hit was desired and like to have be atte last
entrety at home, with the grace of God, whiche have you in his
kepyng. Writen at London the morun after Candelmasse day.
   By John Shillingford, M' of Excetre.
[\INDORSED.\] After makyng of this letter y receyved a Copy of a
writte ayenst John Hulle, as h(ere folowyth).
<P 39>
[^LATIN OMITTED^]
[\ADDRESSED.\] To John Coteler, lutenant, Thomas Cook, John
Germyn, Walter Pope, Richard Druell, and other, this letter be
delyvered, &c.

<Q SHI 1448 JKEMP>
<A JOHN KEMP>
<G M>
<P 41>
[} [\XVI. THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY TO THE BISHOP OF EXETER.
LAMBETH, 16 FEB., 1447-8,\] }]
   Ryght Worshipfull and wyth all my herte right welbeloved
Brother, I grete you well full hertly. And suppose ye be well
remembrid howe that matier whiche longe tyme hath abiden yn
travers bitwixte yow, your Brethren and myn, your Deane and
Chapitre of yowre churche of Excetre, and the Mayer and the
Comminalte of the same, by speciall comaundement of the Kyng was
commytted and putte to the rule of the two chief Justises and
me, wheryn as God knowyth they and I have laboured long tyme,
and specially the last term yn our effectuall wyse for the gode
of pease and sure conclusion to growe therof, bryngyng the
matier by daylie labour to grete ripenesse the soner therby to
have concluded theryn: And for as moche as we myght not
approchyng the ende of the terme further labour theryn, hit was
comyned and desyred nywe bondis to be made and enselid at home
by bothe parties unto Candelmasse last passed trustyng the
matier to have be comyned and yn partie entreted at home. And as
nowe we wold have preceded theryn to somme gode conclusion; and
the matier is attained at large yn the comyn lawe: We praye yow
as yet that, notwithstondyng havyng consideracion the seide
Mayer and Comminalte have att all tymes and yet ben as they
seyen redy to obey and abide all entrety, yow like to putte the
matier to take soner effectuall ende by entrety and
yntercommunicacion than by rigour of the lawe. And yf ther be
eny poynte of grete difficultee or travers, the seide Juges and
I woll putte to owr labour to the remedy
<P 42>
and redresse therof with all our hertis and power. And almyghty
Jhesu have yow ever yn his keeping. Writen at Lamehithe the xvj
daye of February,
   J. Archebysshop of Caunterbury.

<Q SHI 1447 JKEMP>
<A JOHN KEMP>
<G M>
<P 42>
[} [\XVII. THE CHANCELLOR TO THE CHIEF JUSTICE.\] }]
   Worshipfull and right welbeloved Frend, - Y grete yow well,
and doute not ye be well remembred of that mater whiche hath
longe tyme abiden yn travers betwixte my Brother of Excestre the
Deane and Chapitre and the Maier and the Comminalte of Excetre,
wheryn ye for your part have hadde grete laboure; y pray yow,
considryng the mater is attainyd at large in the comyn lawe not
likely by that mene to be ended lightly, as your wysedom knowyth
well, yow like at this tyme yn your beyng ther to move and
enduce my seid Brother and alle parties to putte the mater yn
entrety at home, trustyng as me semyth fully wyth more charite
and lasse coste the mater to take sonner ende by that mene than
by processe or rigour of lawe withoute your dysplase. And
almyghty Jhesu have yow yn his kepyng. Writen, &c.
   The bishop of Canterbury unto the lord Cheff Justice for an
intrety to be had.

<Q SHI 1448 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 50>
[} [\XIX. SHILLINGFORD TO THE CHANCELLOR. SOON AFTER 13 MARCH,
1447-8. DRAFT LETTER.\] }]
   Please hit your gode and gracious lordship to have yn your
blessid remembraunce as touchyng the grete matiers yn debate
betweene the right reverend fader in God and blessed man in him
self and my right gode lord yn tyme hath be and yut throgh your
gracious lordship I truste to God shal be, Edmond Bisshop of
Exceter, the Deane and Chapitre of the same, and the Mayer and
Cominalte yo=r= owne puple and poore bedemen of the seid Cite of
Excetre, how hit pleased yo=r= gode and gracious lordshippe this
same terme of Seynt Hillary to write a lettre unto my seid lord
the Bysshop of Excetre, to have the seyd matier yn trete at home
as hit was bi your lordship comaunded at Mighelmasse terme,
whiche lettre ye yeve me yn special comaundement to bere my self
to my seid lord of Excetre; after which comaundement I toke hit
apoun me and so did, where, through favoure of yo=r= gode
lordship, I ferid wel, had gode chere, and was yn the best wise
right wel come, and al thing comprehendid yn yo=r= lettris yn
ful godely wise take, obeyed, assent, and agreed. Radford and
Copleston to be at Excetre to trete yn the matyer; and so thei
were at tyme of assises, at whiche tyme S=r= Richard Neuton,
chief Justise of the Comun plece, called the parties before him,
and the seid John Copston and N. Radford, and there he hardly
did indifferently his true tendre and diligent labo=r= and parte
for the gode appesyng and welfare of bothe parties yn the seid
mater, after the effect and extent of y=e= blessid lettre fro
your lordship to him send by me.
<P 51>
Whereapon day was assigned on Wensday next after Passion Sonday
[{...{] the seid Copleston and Radford to intrete of this mater;
at whiche day the seid Copston and Radford, and I the seyd
Mayor, with my felowship, were at Kyrton before my seyd [{...{]
Bisshop of Excetre, my lorde of Devonshire at that tyme beyng
present. And there and at that tyme a reule was mouthid and had
accordyng to the forme of a condicion of an obligation, whereof
I have send to yo=r= lordship a copy yn this lettre, to whiche
bothe parties at that tyme aggreed and assentid ham, a special
communication had before with the seid justise by me the seyd
[{...{] my counseil and felowship; trustying to God and to yo=r=
gode lordship to have right a gode ende. And, yf noe, ever to
resorte to your gode lordship accordant to the kynges
comaundement, by Goddis mercy, whiche preserve yo=r= gode
lordship in his high mercy.

<Q SHI 1448 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 65>
[} [\XXV. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS. (?)APRIL 1448. DRAFT
LETTER.\] }]
   Worthy sirs, y grete yow well alle, doyng yow to understonde
that y was at Wyndesore to London wardis on seynt George is day,
and there taried almost all that day, and cowde not hyre ne
knowe
<P 66>
there of noo thyng comprehended yn the letter y sende home to
yow by William Duke, ne of none other thyng, bot all ther as
well as hit was wont to be, and as y suppose with laboure and
other thyng that longeth therto, yf men wyll better may be. The
Wendisday y came to London, where was moche longage of oure
comyn mater, and specially of this laste grete entrety at home,
how hit was broken up, and for right litell thyng, and all yn
oure defaute. Thus hit was y seid that accorde was hadde here at
home by the seide entrety, that the Bisshop sholde have his fee
churche and cimitere parcell of the same, as he claymeth
generally, and generall municion yn the churche, we to have
right noght to don ne make none arestis withynne his fee, bot yn
the cimitere to make arrestis, excepte of the Bysshop and his
mayny, chanons, and alle men of habite, and for we wolde noght
aggre bot to have power to arreste chanons men servants
familiars withynne the cimitere, was only cause of brekyng up of
the seide entrety. Y of purpose mette with S=r= John Wolston, of
wham y suppose growe all this untrue longage, and asked hym, &c.
He seid every word, and that the accorde was suche as hit is
aboveseide, with more that ther was writyng therof, and by what
menys y write, by the hondis of John More, yn presence of my
lord of Devonshire, atte Blak Freris at Excetre, all redy to
shewe; y seide if any suche writyng were knowe and proved by my
seide Lorde and the other arbitrous, we moste nedys and with
right gode will wolde abide hit, or any other reporte that they
wolde make. This same day Wendisday, as sone as y was come to
towne ayenst mete tyme, my lord Chaunceller send for me yn hast.
Y came to hym in Lambyth, wher y founde the ii Chif Justises of
purpos moche y suppose: of wham alle and specially of my lord y
hadde right gode chere, never better, and right well come yn the
best wise. Y spake with my seide lord and the Justises, apart
fro my Conseill, a grete whiles. They moved me to knowe of the
entrety and departyng at home. Y prayed my lordes
<P 67>
to have my Conseill to seye for me. He graunted hit to me. S=r=
John Wolston was yn the utter chamber, and wolde come noo nyre,
and for as moche as Hengston was not there hit was enjorned over
yn to the morun at Westminster, yn the Escheker Chamber, wher
Hengston reported to my seid lord as S=r= John Wolston hath as
hit is aboveseid, excepte of writyng. Y answered and seide y
knywe noght therof, nee of noo such accorde, ne cowde make noo
reporte, and asked of hym what knowliche he hadde of that he
reported. He seide as he herde hit reported. Y asked of wham. He
seide the comyn voys of the Cite. Y seide of none bot of soche
as were of theire part, and by tham self. Y seid forthermore
that y was enformed by S=r= John Walston ther beyng present that
ther was writyng of that reporte, as hit is aboveseide.

<Q SHI 1448 JSHILLINGFORD>
<A JOHN SHILLINGFORD>
<G M>
<P 67>
[} [\XXVI. SHILLINGFORD TO HIS FELLOWS. (?) 24 MAY, 1448. DRAFT
LETTER.\] }]
   Worthy siris, ryght feyne ffrendis and ffelows, y grete yow
well alle, doyng yow to understonde that on Wendisday next after
Corporis Christi day, as ye knowe right well, after vj atte
clokke yn the mornyng y rode oute of Exceter to London warde;
the Saterdey next ther after at vij atte clokke by the mornyng y
came to London, and so to Westminster, and ther mette with my
lord Chaunceller, he beyng yn right grete bysyness; as sone as
he sawe me seyde right hertely, "Mayer well come," and toke me
by the honde, and made me right gode chere, and so departed fro
hym at that tyme. That day y hadde right grete bysynesse: furst
y went yn to the Escheco for oure mater of Exmouth, and there y
spedde spede can and may spede resonabylly well. That day on
Westminster halle y mette
<P 68>
with S=r= John Wolston, and other of oure [\and\] theire
conseill, of wham alle y hadde gode chere, and as they seide
that y was right well come. Afterward y spake w=t= the chif
Justis S=r= John Fortescu, goyng w=t= hym homward, and hadde
with hym right muche gode longage and wordis of comfort. After
this y spake with the chif justice S=r= Richard Nuton, thankyng
hym of his favo=r= the last terme, &c. He, a full gode man,
seide he wolde do for me what he myght godely. That day y
comyned w=t= oure conseill of oure maters, and hadde wordis of
gode comfort to spede right well. That day after none y wold
have be at Lambeth w=t= my lord, bot y came not there because
that Wolston was there that day. The morun be tyme y came to my
lord, and hadde hym at right godd short leyso=r=; to wham y
recommended you all to hym yn the best maner that y coude,
thankyng hym of his gode lordship, &c. praying contynuance at
this tyme specially, and to helpe that we myght have a gode ende
by doyng after the kynges commaundement, for elles we most to a
triall, and that were harde. He seide, "God hit forbede, then
sholde ye never love, and that were pyty," and he seide he woll
speke with the Chif Justise Fortescu, and +ten another rule, &c.
Y thanked hym and seide, "My lord, they take grete boldenesse of
ij thynges, oon of truste of the Shirf, another apon the lawe, y
truste to Gode other wyse than they shall fynde hit." Also y
seide to my lord that we hadde be yn debate by dyvers tymes,
almost by tyme of viij=xx= yere, and that y coude never knowe
fynde ne rede that we ever toke a sute ayenst tham, but ever
stonde yn defence, as a bokeler player, and smyte never, and
that y hadde to seye fro you to hym that we were fully avysed,
with leve of his gode lordeship, onys to smyte, takyng a sute,
for we hadde meny and dyvers causis, and they hadde none, bot
that we wold no thyng do bote that his gode lordship hadde know
liche of, for we wold attempte hym yn no wyse. He thanked and
seyde that he coude not blame us. Y seide, "My lord, thus we
most beare, serve and defende," that not with stondyng that, we
woll be all redy at all tyme to obeye the kynges commaundement
and his.



<B PLUMPTON>

[^PLUMPTON CORRESPONDENCE. A SERIES OF LETTERS, CHIEFLY
DOMESTICK, WRITTEN IN THE REIGNS OF EDWARD IV. RICHARD III.
HENRY VII. AND HENRY VIII. ED. BY STAPLETON, THOMAS. CAMDEN
FIRST SERIES 4. 1839.^]

<Q PLU 1461 BROCLIFFE>
<A BRIAN ROCLIFFE>
<G M>
<P 2>
[} [\LETTER II.\] }] 
(^Unto my right reverent and worshipfull maister, Maister Sir
William Plompton, knight.^)
   My right reverent and honorable maister, All humble
recomendation praemised, please you that I receaved of your
servant John Smith xl marks, and your letter to the Tresorer and
Barons of the exchequer for respitt of your day to xv=na=
Hillary, which would not be graunted but soe I have gotten
that one shall appeare for you att the day of account and soe to
be appeared for in the pipe, and then for to be prepared in the
next tearme; and soe I have labored a felaw of mine to be your
Atturney in the Court, for I may nought be but of Counsell, and
he and I shall shew you such service all that time and afterward
that shall be pleasing unto you. And soe shall ye have day or
respitt to the xv of hillary next coming, then to be opposed of
your greenewax; att which time ye may nott faile to send hider
all your bookes and some readie man for to answer unto him, for
I nor my said felaw may nott attend thereupon, and also to be
here yourselfe than or before to pursue for your pardon, and to
gree all your demaundes att once. And I trust to god for to gett
you downe your greenewax if that I may, thof it cost you mony;
soe ye wrote unto me, beseeching our
<P 3>
lord to gif you good speed against all your enemies and in all
your matters. Written in hast at Westminster the fift day of
November.
   Your servant, Bryan Rocliff.
[\5 Nov. 1461.\]

<Q PLU 1463 BROCLIFFE>
<A BRIAN ROCLIFFE>
<G M>
<P 5>
[} [\LETTER IV.\] }] 
(^Unto his right reverend and honorable master Sir William
Plompton, knight, in hast.^)
   Right reverend and honorable Sir, and mine especiall good
maister, after all humble recomandations, with dew regraces and
hartly thankings of your kind mastership unto me undeserved,
effectualy my trust is desiring continuance. Please you that I
have communed with Beford in your mater as ye wrote to me, and I
cannot find him disposed that he will eyther grant you any
yeares of payment, or els to be content by any soum yearly to be
paid, and he will agre to no treate but if he have some money in
hand, and so he haith taken his (\exigi facias de novo\) and is
with us called in the hustings; marveling me that after writing
by letter and comunication by mouth, ye tender not hartyly that
matter, considring the other obligation which might be executed
against Plumtre of Nottinggam, if ye wold doe your devor,
beseching you to remember your honestie and wellfare. And Sir, I
have tretid with Wigmore and at few words, I find him right hard
and strange and soe ye bene iij called in Midlesex; wherfore ye
must purvay hastely remmedy, for he will noe more trust faire
wordes as he saith; thus remiting matters to your discrett
wisdom, whom the holiest enspire to your profit and pleasure, my
advis being allwaies redy. Written in hast at London, the 19th
of May.
   Your servant, Brian Roclife.
[\19 May, anno circiter 1462.\]

<Q PLU 1462 BROCLIFFE>
<A BRIAN ROCLIFFE>
<G M>
<P 6>
[} [\LETTER V.\] }] 
(^Unto his reverent maister Sir William Plompton, knight, in
hast.^)
   In speciall my verray good maister, after due recomendations;
my maister the Chief Baron comuned to my lord Treasorer of
certaine matters, and soe my lord opened that Thomas Beckwith
was his Awnte son, and he would make him eschetour; saying, that
he loved you right well and would fayne an end were taken
betwixt you and Beckwith, willing my said maister to take upon
him the rewle, and would undertake Beckwith to be ruled by him,
if he would take it upon him, who disclosed this unto me, nott
certaine that ye would agree. And I answered that I supposed ye
would agree to all reason, enforming him of the trewthe of the
matter to my cuning after your information; soe that if such
writing be had unto you by the advice of your trewe in reason,
in reason it is to be agreed with reason, as my simplesse
seemeth, saveing your better advise. And Sir, Beford hath spoken
with me, sayeing that the matter is broken up in the default of
Sir Harry,
<P 7>
that kept no tyme, and soe he purposes to continue and take out
his suite, whom with soberness I entreate, affirming that ye
will be here this tearme, and as long as I may, but I have noe
grant of him. And Colt hath spoken to me for the remainder of
the money, which he should send with the Bill of issues and for
costes. And Beford hath spoken with Plomptree for the other
obligation under sewertee, and soe in manner of a certante of
payment, but now it is deatt the lyeing at large. Thus matters
remitted to your said discretion whom our lord govern and haf in
his keeping. Written in hast in the temple the fourtenth day of
October.
   Your servant, Bryan Roclif.
[\14 Oct. anno circiter 1462.\]

<Q PLU 1463 BROCLIFFE>
<A BRIAN ROCLIFFE>
<G M>
<P 7>
[} [\LETTER VI.\] }] 
(^Unto his singuler good maister Sir William Plompton, knight.^)
   Right worshippfull my singuler good mastre, as my dewtie is,
with intier regraces I recomend me unto you, whose honor ioy and
prosperitie I beseech the blessed trinitie to encrease dayly as
I would haf of my simple person. Sir, I thank you among
inumerable other, of your comfortable letter that you now take
your disport att your libertee. And as touching my lord, I shall
ride to M- to him within these 4 daies and doe my part, and as I
shall find him, so shall I certifie you. Sir, as anenst
Scatergood I hafe yett taken a longer continuance unto new yeare
day, and I would fayne that it were att an end, thof it cost you
mony for countermaunding and noysing; that would be had by privy
seales, for they go light cheape, and send me your will therein.
Sir, it is necessary that T. Beckwith be content at this time of
x=li=, for losse
<P 8>
of money by suites makes more payments. Sir, if it like you that
Richard F- aftre this yoole might entend upon me toward London,
seing your presence now here, and ye might forgo him, I would
have of you knowledge, for other have labored me, whome I
respite therefore. Butt dissease or displease would nott I you
in any wise. As for Gouldesburgh yett mett we nott, but now I
trust that ye shall confirme all that first was named, and for
Gods sake performe it (\(quia mora trahitt periculum)\) or his
brother Edward goe to London att twentie day of yoole, and ellis
will it straunge and delay. And think how ye lost Robert Ros
son. Your daughter and myn, with humble recomendations, desireth
your blessing, and speaketh prattely and french and hath near
hand learned her sawter. Sir, Henry Suthill hath knowledge of
her feofment, as a man tould me secretly, but for all that I
trust all shalbe well, with the grace of the blessed trinitie,
who quyte you and send you all your desires. Writen in hast at
Colthrop on fryday.
   Your serviseable brother, Bryan Roucliffe
[\Dec. 1463.\]

<Q PLU 1464 GGREENE>
<A GODFREY GREENE>
<G M>
<P 9>
[} [\LETTER VII.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull maistre Sir William Plompton, kt.^)
   Right worshipfull maistre, I recomend me unto you. Please it
you to witt the minister of St. Roberts has taken 2 suits, one
of trespas for delving his ground att St. Robert, another of
debt and detinue both in a writt, debt 12 marks, which as I
understand by Horberey should be lent to you. Be the place
[\plea\] of the detinue for a chalise shold be lent to you; also
the writts were out, but I caused Horberey (\per album breve\) ,
so the sheriff shall have none paid for the writts, by the avise
of Mr. Rocliff. I pray you send answerre against the next
tearme; also had I understood for certain what goods Folbaron
and Walker had of yours, I shold have bene answerd this terme by
Horberey not guilty, which is the best issue you can have: I
pray you send word against the next terme. Also Whele had sent
out (\exigi facias de novo\) against Holden, Hanworth and West,
or I came here, and said they were returned (\quarto exactus\) ;
he had given them to short a day. Whearfore he said he wold
write unto you for an excuse, and pray the (\exigi\) against
West may be withdrawen: I promissed he should take no hurt by
the proces. Also Whele sends you a (\capias utlegat\) . against
Harldre by Rauf Annias, but he delivered it to the Sheriff. I
shall send you another with the Copie of your
<P 10>
new suites and a (\venire facias\) against the ministre. Mr.
Rocliff hath labored effectually this tearme for your matter of
Stamford, and for my lady Inglestrop for your sake, and to Pake
also; and also he dined with my lady and thanked her hertely for
your sake. I trust by his labour your matter of Stamford shall
take a good end with the grace of God, who have you evermore in
his keeping. Written att London 14 february.
   Your servant Godfrey Grene.
[\14 Feb. 1463-4.\]

<Q PLU 1464 GGREENE>
<A GODFREY GREENE>
<G M>
<P 10>
[} [\LETTER VIII.\] }] 
(^Unto my reverend and worshipfull master, Sir William Plompton,
kt.^)
   Reverend and worshipfull master, after all due recomendations
had; Sir, as for your suites against the minister and others,
they shalbe called upon as effectually as I can, and with the
grace of God shall take as good speed as the law will suffer,
howbeit that Horbury sais that ye and the minister stand in
comprimise to abide the award of Sir John Malivera and others,
and that he hath in comaund to continue the suite of the
minister by reason of the same; notwithstanding, your suit shall
proceed untill the time ye send otherwise in comaund. And as for
the byeing of the velvett, the mony upon the obligacion of Mr.
Suthill is nott
<P 11>
paid; he said Barnby wilbe here with it this tearme. God send
grace it be so, for Mr. Byngham, Tho. Eyr, and Chapman of
Stamford, everichone of them attends after his part this tearme.
And as for the suits I shall borow untill the time the other
come. There is a yong man, a mercer in the Chepe, the which a
Michaelmas purpose to sett up a shop of his owne, the which
mercer makes great labor to my lady and to Jeffrey Dawne for my
sister Isabell to marry with her; lyvelode he hase none, a
Norfolk man and of birth no gent. as I can understand; what he
is worth in goods I cannott wytt. Mercers deals nott all
together with their owne proper goods. How be it my lady P. hath
proferred him faire, that is to say, xl=li= in mony of my lady
and her freinds and my lady to find her thre yeare if he will,
and Jeffrey hath proferred to lend him for iiij yeare a hundreth
merce, the which mony is ready in a bag if they agre. I moved
unto my lady and Jeffrey, as far as I durst for displease, that
the mony was muche without she had some twentie of other of
lyvelods or of goods, to the which my sister, as fare forth as
she durst, abode upon; by the which they brake and nott
concluded. And my lady and Jeffrey agreed well to the same,
notwithstanding my sister ne I cannot think it is for her to
refuse my ladies labour nor agreement, but wholie to put her to
my ladies rule and ordinance, and so she did att all times. How
be it my lady said to her it shold come of herselfe, and she
answerred that of her selfe she could nott ne wold nothing do
without the advise of you and her freinds, but whatsoever my
lady thought she shold do, she wold do it unwitting you or any
of her freinds. Whearfore I
<P 12>
beseech you as hastely as it please you, to send me word of your
intent, for she and I wold faine do that at might be most to
your pleasure and her profitt. Also Mr. Byngham hath spoken to
Mr. Rocliff and me to witt what day ye wold be in
Nottinghamshire, and I could not answere thereto; ye may send
him word as it please you. Also I am not very certaine of the
day and yeare that your milne dam was broken; I pray you send
the certaintie this terme and ye may, that it may be amended if
it be wrong. And all your other matters shalbe called upon with
the grace of God, who have you evermore in proteccion. Written
at London the xiiii=th= day of June.
   Also as for the mercer, I understand he profers now to find
surety that if he die, she to have a C=li= besides her part of
his goods after the custome of the Cittie.
   Your servant Godfrey Grene.
[\14 June 1464.\]

<Q PLU 1464 BROCLIFFE>
<A BRIAN ROCLIFFE>
<G M>
<P 12>
[} [\LETTER IX.\] }] 
(^Unto the reverend and right worshipful Sir William Plompton,
knight, my singular good master, be this delivered.^)
   Right reverend worshipful Sir, intirly beloved brother, and
singularly my good master, after al faithful and due
recommendations praemised and special regraces and thankings, as
I have mo causes than I can write, which our Lord acquit, where
I by non power am restrained, desiring him dayly for your honor
prosperity, ioy, and longanimity, to bee encreased to your
pleasur; Sir, like you to remember, the conclusions of the
matter taken betwixt you and Chapman of Stamford by Husee and
mee, that yee for to have his releas general should pay 100
(^s.^) , wherof I paid 4 marks in hand which you paid mee again;
and now this term by
<P 13>
the advise of Huzze, thorowh importune clamor of Chapman, and
you to bee in quiet delivering your acquittance, I paid 33
(^s.^) 4 (^d.^) afore Husze to Chapman, so that now you bee
utterly out of his dammage. And, Sir, I conceived, by the
remembrance of my cosin Mr. Midleton, that yee willed mee to buy
to you, black velvet for a gown. But, Sir, I pray you herin
blame my non power but not my will, for in faith I might not doo
it, but gif I should run in papers of London, which I did never
yet, so I have lived poorly therafter; for and I might els haue
doon it, I shold not have spared. But the wis man saith to us,
(\Impedit omne forum carentia Denariorum\) . And that prooves
here now: I dare not write al my complaint. Sir, Thomas Eyr
clamoreth upon mee importunly for money, so that gif I had any
of my own, I wold have stopped him, and so as I might have
promised him this next term, which like you for to send hither
than: for and hee begin his suit now, he wil not bee so easily
entreated. And also, Sir, I pray you specially for to send mee
money fro Nesfield, according to your appointment and saing at
our last departing, for and ye knew how it stands with mee here,
I trust verily yee wold tender mee the more. And, Sir, the
rather I pray you, for I purpose to have your son John Roclif to
court at beginning of this next terme, where my charge of him in
array and other exspences, shal encreas to the double, as God
knowes, whom I beseech entirly, for to have you in his keeping,
and graunt you all your desires. Written in hast in the midle
temple, (\tertio die
<P 14>
decembris\) . Sir, Sir Henry Vavasor was gone hence or I wist,
so that I might not speak to him for the wapp: my Thomas may go
to him and speed I trow.
   Your servisable brother, Brian Rocliff.
[\3 Dec. 1464.\]

<Q PLU 1468 GGREENE>
<A GODFREY GREENE>
<G M>
<P 18>
[} [\LETTER XIII.\] }]
(^To my right reverend and most especiall good maistre Sir
William Plompton, knight.^)
   Right reverend and my moste speciall gude maistre, I recomend
me unto your good mastership, and as touching your (\nisi
prius\)
<P 19>
against Fulbaron, it were well doon that ye appointed with Mr.
Danby at what place and what day in his comeing home after the
next tearme ye would have it served; soe that I might have word
the begining of the next tearme, to take out the writt,
according to your appointment. Also as for the writt against
Geffray Malivera, John Cockle, Rich. Croft, Hanson and other, I
stand in doubt whether Mr. Midleton and Mr. Ros greed you and
Sir John Malivera thereof, or no, because they are his men;
notwithstanding if they agreed you nott, and ye send me word, I
trust to have an exigent the next tearme. My Lord of Oxford is
comitt to the tower, and it is said kept in irons, and that he
has confessed myche thinge; and on Munday afore St. Andrew day
one Alford and Poiner, gentlemen to my Lord of Northfolk, and
one S=r= peirs, Skinner of London, were beheaded; and on the
morne
<P 20>
after was Sir Thomas Tresham arest and is comitt to the tower:
and it is said he was arested upon the confession of my Lo. of
Oxford, and they say his livelhood, and Sir John Marneys
livelhood, and divers other livelhuds is given away by the king.
Also there is arest Mr. Hungerford, the heir unto the Lord
Hungerford, and one Courtney, heir unto the Earle of Devonshire,
and many other, whose names I know nott; and it is said that Sir
Edmund Hungerford is send for. And also the yeomen of the Crowne
bene riden into diverse countries to arrest men that be apeched.
Also it was told me that Sir Robt. Ughtred was send for, but I
trust to God it is not so, who have you evermore in his blessed
proteccion. Written at London, 9 of December.
   Your servant Godfrey Greene.
[\9 Dec. 8 Edw. IV. 1468.\]

<Q PLU 1469 GGREENE>
<A GODFREY GREENE>
<G M>
<P 22>
[} [\LETTER XV.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull maistre Sir William Plompton, knight,
this letter be delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull master, I recomend me unto your good
mastership; Sir, I have sent to you by the bringer of this
letter, a (\venire facias\) against the minister of St.
Robert's, for he hath pleaded not guiltie for fishing your ponds
att Plompton; if so be your writt be well served and the issue
tried for you, the punishment will be grevieous to them, for it
is gyffin by a statute. Also I have sent you a (\venire facias\)
against Dromonby, parson of Kynalton; he hath pleaded - he
withholds you nothing, in accion of detynu of the goods,
delivered him by Heynes. Also the copie of the pleadings betwixt
you and the minister for your
<P 23>
milne att Plompton; it were well done that ye had a speech with
Mr. Midleton of the forme of the pleadings, and of the matter
both of the title of his milne, and your milne, and of the
freholdes of both sides the water, for that your counsell may
have instruccion thereof: it hath cost you money this terme, and
yett no conclusion but to change the pleadings the next terme at
the pleasure of the parties. Mr. Midleton had great labour
therewith, I profferd him no rewards because ye may reward him
yourselfe as it please you. Maister Fairfax had x=s= for that
matter all on. Mr. Suttill labored effectually; I tould him he
shold be rewarded of the mony in his hands, and said lightly he
would have none; so I wot whether he will take or no: he hath
nott all paid yett. I pray you, against the next terme, send me
word how I shall be demened in rewards giveing, for and it go to
matter in law, it will cost mony largely. Also I have sent you a
(\Capias utlegat\) . against Hargreve of Fuston; Sir John
Malevera gave me a chalenge for him, and said he was outlawd
under my trety: I told him I treted never; I bare your message
to him, and that was a continuance for the matter against
Fulburn, but nott for Hargreve. And he said ye had sued all the
trew men to the king, to my lord, and to him in the forest, sith
that ye come home; and that he shold complaine to the king and
to the lords thereof; and I said, I trust to God ye shold come
to your answere. And he said that shold not lyg in my power to
bring you to do, for he wold deele with you and yours, both be
the law and besides the law; and said he wold cutt the clothes
notwithstanding. He was full angrie and hastie what time he said
soe, and I was with Mr. Roclif the same time he gave me this
chalenge, and Myles Willesthorp was with him, and said no word.
And Maister Roclif asked him what the matter was, if he might
any ease; and he
<P 24>
answered him, that ye desseyved him and all that ye dellyd
withall: and Mr. Rocliff said he trust to God, - who have you
evermore in his proteccion. Written at London, the v=th= day of
December.
   Your servant Godfrey Grene.
[\5 Dec. 1469.\]

<Q PLU 1475 GGREENE>
<A GODFREY GREENE>
<G M>
<P 29>
[} [\LETTER XXIV.\] }] 
(^To my right reverend and worshipfull Maistre, Sir William
Plompton, knight.^)
   Right worshippfull Sir, I recomend me unto your good
mastershipp; Sir, as for a (\supersedias\) for yourselfe, there
will not be gotten, without I shold put in sufficient men to be
suerties; for there is a new rule made in the Chancery now late,
that no sureties
<P 30>
shalbe accepted, but such as be sufficient, and twenty of the
old common sureties dischardged: so it is hard to gett suerties
for a yoman. And as for the supliants, I have dayly labored,
sith your man come, to gett a man to aske the suertie; and so I
fand one which hath bene of old a (\supersedias\) mounger, and
was agreed with him that he shold gett me a man to aske it, and
he and the man shold have had v=s=. for their labor; and so he
said unto me and Thom. on Saturday last that it was done, and
desired mony for the mans labor and for the sealing, and we
shold have them forth withall: and so he hath driven us from
morne to even, and in conclusion deceyved us, and hath receved
vii=s=. vi=d=. And I may nott arreast him nor strive with him
for the mony, nor for the decept, because the matter is not
worshipfull; and so there is none odere meane, but dayly to
labor him to gett the writts, and so I shall, and send them to
you asoune as they may be gotten: the labor is great and
perillous, and the anger is more, because of the decept. As for
the suit of Tulis executor, it is delaid for this terme, but the
next terme it cannot be delaid; therefore it were well done ye
sought up your writtings, and all the sircumstances of making
the obligacion, and whear it was made; for there is none will
make a plea, without he have some matter to make it of: and also
the court will nott admitt a forreine plea, without the matter
be somewhat likely to be true. As for all your oder suits, they
have the speed the law will give them, as Horbury will enforme
you, when he comes home. As for the (\supena\) , the writt is
nott retorned in; it seemes it will take a delay. I have sent
you a copie of the letter, and a (\supersedias\) for Ward of
Breeton; and as for your awne, if so be ye will that I put in
sufficient suerties for you, ye may have one; but saveing your
better advise, me think it nott necessary so to do, without oder
cause shold require: for as strong in the law is a
(\supersedias\) of a Justice of the peace, as in
<P 31>
the Chancery. And as for your bottles, there came no samon men
here of all this sumor, but I understood they will come now
hastely; by the next at comes they shalbe sent, with Gods grace,
who have you evermore in his blessed proteccion. Written att
London, the x=th= day of July. Thomas can enforme you of
novelties in this countrie better then I can writte.
   Your servant Godfrey Greene.
[\10 July, anno circiter 1475.\]

<Q PLU 1475 GGREENE>
<A GODFREY GREENE>
<G M>
<P 31>
[} [\LETTER XXV.\] }] 
(^To his right worshipfull maistre, Sir William Plompton, kt.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, I recomend me unto your good
maistershipp; Sir, as for the suit against you by the executors
of parson Tuly, had not it fortuned that there was a default
founden in the writt, it had bene so that ye had bene condemned,
or els an (\exigi\) awarded against you; for as for the matter
of your plea, there would noe man plead it, ne it would not have
bene except, if it had bene pleaded. Sir, there is an indenture
upon the same (\oblige\) , the which wold serve much of your
intents, and it might be found. Also, sir, now of late I have
receaved from you diverse letters, of the which the tenure and
effect is this; one, that I shold labour to Sir John Pilkinton,
to labor to my lord of Glocester or to the king; they to move my
lord of Northumberland that ye might occupie still at
Knaresborou. Sir, as to that, it is thought here by such as
loves you, 'at that labour should rather
<P 32>
hurt in that behalve then availe; for certaine it is, as long as
my lord of Northumberlands patent thereof stands good, as long
will he have no deputie but such as shall please him, and kan
him thank for the gift thereof, and no man els, and also doe him
servise next the king: so the labour shalbe fair answered, and
turne to none effect, but hurt. And as to another point
comprised in your writing, that is, to enforme the lords and
their counsell of the misgovernances of Gascoin and his
affinitie. Sir, ye understand that in every law the saying of a
mans enemies is chalengeable, and rather taken a saying of
malice then of treuthe, where, by the correction of the same
defaulte, the complainer hath no availe; and so certainly by
your counsell is thought here, that it wold be soe taken, and in
no other wise, how be it that it be trew: and also a disworship
to my lord of Northumberland, that hath the cheif rule there
under the king. And as for the matter, to informe my lord of
Northum: counsell how ye were entreated at Knasboro - Sir, we
enformed my lords counsell according to your comaundement, and
they enformed my lord, and my lord said he wold speak with us
himselfe, and so did, and this was the answerr: that the cause
why he wrote that no court of Sheriff turne shold be holden, was
for to shew debate betwixt you and Gascoins affinitie, unto time
he might come into the country and se a derection betwixt you -
and that he wold 'at the 3 weeks court were holden for
discontinuance of mens actions - and that he entended not to
dischardge you of your office, ne will not as long as ye be
towards him - and that as soune as he comes into cuntry, he
shall see such
<P 33>
a derection betwixt his brother Gascoin and you, as shalbe to
your harts ease and worship. And that I understand by his
counsell, that it shalbe assigned unto you by my lo: and his
counsell, what as longes to your office, and Gascoin nott meddle
therewithall; and in like wise to Gascoyne. And as for the
labour for the bailiships and farmes, Sir, your worship
understands what labour is to sue therefore; first, to have a
bill enclosed of the King, then to certein lords of the
Counsell, (for there is an act made that nothing shall passe fro
the King unto time they have sene it,) and so to the privie
seale and Chauncellor: so the labour is so importune, that I
cannot attend it without I shold do nothing ells, and scarcely
in a month speed one matter. Your maistership may remember how
long it was, or we might speed your bill of Justice of the
peace; and had not my Lo. of Northumberland been, had not been
sped for all the fair promisses of my Lo. Chamberlaine. And as
for the message to my Lo. Chamberlain, what time I labored to
him that ye might be Justice of the peace, he answered thus;
that it seemed by your labor and mine, that we wold make a
jelosie betwixt my Lo. of Northumberland and him, in that he
shold labor for any of his men, he being present. Sir, I took
that for a watche word for medling betwixt Lords. As for any
matter ye have to do in the law, how be it that it be to me
losse of time and costly to labor or medl, as yett I am and
alwayes shalbe readie to doe you service and pleasure therein,
with the grace of God, who have you evermore in his blessed
protection. Written att London, the eight day of November.
   Your servant, Godfrey Greene.
[\8 Nov. anno circiter 1475.\]

<Q PLU 1476? GGREENE>
<A GODFREY GREENE>
<G M>
<P 35>
[} [\LETTER XXVII.\] }] 
(^To the right reverend and worshipfull Sir William Plompton,
knight, this to be delivered.^)
   Right reverent and worshipfull Sir, I recomend me unto your
good mastership. Please you to witt that I labored to Mr.
Pilkinton and to the Chaunceler diverse times for your letter
fro the King, and promissed me to move my lord to speak to the
King therefore; neverthelesse it was not doon, but when the King
comes to London, I shall labour therefore againe. Your writts
and (\certiorare\) are labored for, and shalbe had, how be the
judges will graunt no (\certiorare\) but for a cause. Ailmer
wife was like to have bene non suit in her appeale, for her day
was (\octabis martini\) ; but Whele and I certified the judges
that she wold come if she were in hele, and out of prison. The
judges gifnes her no favour, for they say they understand by
credible informations, that these men be not guiltie, and is but
onely your maintenance; and so one of them said to me out of the
Court. And Guy Fairfax said openly att the barre, that he knew
so, verily they were not guilty, - that he wold labor their
deliverance for almes, not takeing a penny; and I seing this,
took Mr. Pygott and Mr. Collow.
   Godfrey Grene.
[\Anno circiter 1476-7.\]

<Q PLU 1477 RTPLUMPTON>
<A ROBENET PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 36>
[} [\LETTER XXVIII.\] }] 
(^To my most reverent and worshippfull maister Sir William
Plompton, knight, be this delivered.^)
   After all lowly and dew recomendations, I lowly recommend me
unto your good maistershipp; certifieing your maistership I sent
you by one Wil. Atkinson a letter and the copie of the answerre
of the privie seale, and a box with 6 peeces, 5 sealed and one
unsealed; and, Sir, the box sealed for your maistershipp took me
no more. First, thes tooke me 7, and 2 filed together that were
of one, the graunt of Stutvell and the peticion thereon; and
they tooke away the petition, and soe I had but 6, whilk I send
your mastershipp by the said William in the said box sealed; and
if it were so, and the letter delivered to you with the copie, I
desire you send word. As for your say, I have sent you a peice
of 2 yards and a halfe broad by Grethum of York, the first of
Lent. As for the other peice, there is none of lesse bredth then
2 yards; for if I could have any, I should have sent it with the
other. And as for the cloth of my ladies, Hen. Cloughe putt it
to a shereman to dight, and he sold the cloth and ran away; and
yett after Hen: mett with him, and gart him be sett in the
Countre, till he founde sewerte to answer at the Gildehall for
the cloth. And soe he hath sewed him till he had judgment to
recover, which cost him large money; and when he shold deliver
it, he delivered another peice, butt that Henry hapned to
understand after the recovery wheare he had sould it; and soe it
is had againe and it is put to dyeing, and as soune as it is
readie, I shall send it by the carrier, for it was fryday in the
second week of Lent or it was gettin again. And as for suites in
the Kings bench again them in Brereton, and in the Common place
again Will. Pulleyne and his suertes, are in proces; and fro
they be in exigent, ye shall have the exigent sent
<P 37>
you, as soun as it will be sped. And for the day of appearaunce
of Ailmer wyfe, is (\mense Paske\) ; so that she be here the
morrow after (\mense Paske\) . I shold have sent you word or
that, but that I had nott the (\habeas Corpus\) against John
Esomock, and Robart Galaway, and for to see that we were not
beguiled by the day of returne and day of appearance; be it my
day. And soe I send you now the (\habeas corpora\) and a coppie
thereof, and you must desier the sheriffe to serve it, yf so be
that ye agre not. And also, Sir, that ye will send word as soon
as ye can, if the principalls were delivered not att York, and
what way is had betwixt you and them, and if there be any towne
or hamlett in Craven that is called Medilton, and that ye send
word. And as for your cope, I have cheaped diverse, and under a
hundred shillings I can by non, that is ether of damaske or
sattin, with flowers of gold; and I send you a peice of baudkin,
and another of impereal, to se whether ye will hafe of, and the
price. And the bredth of it is elme broade; 3 yards, besides the
orffrey, will make a cope: to have of whilk it please you, ether
to be made ... or there. And if ye will have it to be made here,
it will stand ye to 6 marks or more, with the orfrey and
makeing, and that is the least that I can drive it to. The
orffrey 32s., the lining and making 8s., and as for a broderer,
I can find none that will come soe farre, but any work that ye
would have, to send hither and they will do it; and in no other
wise they will as yett grant me, but I shall that I may to gett
one. Alsoe, Sir, I send your mastership the bill of the expences
and costs that I have made since I came hither, and please you
to see it and send money the next terme. All other thinges,
whilk ye will I do, and I shall doe therein that I ether may or
can. I beseech your mastership
<P 38>
to recomend me lowly to my lady; and if I durst, Sir, the matter
betwixt my brother Robart and Mr. Gascoines sister, me think, is
to long in makeing up, for in long tarriing comes mekell
letting. And I beseech the blessed Trinitie have you in his
continual keeping. From London, the first day of Aprill.
   Your servant in all, Robenett P.
[\1 April 1476.\]

<Q PLU 1480 H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 40>
[} [\LETTER I.\] }] 
(^To my Right welbeloved Robart Plompton, esquier.^)
   Right welbeloved frinde, I greet you well. And wheras the
Scotts in great number are entred into Northumberland, whose
malice with Gods helpe I entend to resist; therfore on the King,
our soveraigne Lords behalfe, I charg you, and also on myne as
wardeyn, that ye with all such personnes as ye may make in there
most defensible arrey, be with me at Topliffe uppon Munday by
viij a clocke, as my trust is in you. Written in Wresill, the
vij day of September.
   Your Cousin, Hen. Northumberland.
[\7 Sept. 1480\]

<Q PLU 1481 H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 42>
[} [\LETTER III.\] }] 
(^To my welbeloved Robart Plompton.^)
   Right welbeloved, I gret you well, willing and charging you
to be with me in all hast possible after the sight of this my
writting; not failing herof, as ye will answere to the Kings
highnes and to me at your perill. Written at Lekinfeild, the
last day of December.
   Henry Northumberland.
[\31 Dec. 1481.\]

<Q PLU 1481 H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 42>
[} [\LETTER IV.\] }] 
(^To my right trusty and welbeloved freind, Sir Robart Plompton,
Kt.^)
   Right trusty and welbeloved, I greet you well, and will and
charg you on the King our soveraigne Lords behalfe, and also on
myne, that ye, with all such persones as ye may make defensibly
arrayed, be redy to attend uppon the Kings highnes and me, upon
our warnyng, as ye love me and will answere to the King at your
perill. Written at Lekingfeld, the ix=th= day of October.
   Your Cousin, Henry Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1483 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 43>
[} [\LETTER V.\] }] 
(^To the right honorable my especyall good master, Sir Robert
Plompton, knight.^)
   After all due recomendations premysed, pleaseth your
mastership to wyt that I have received my fee xxvi (^s.^) viii
(^d.^) for Pentycost last past, sent to me by my fader servant,
William Coltman, in my most humbly wyse thanking your mastership
therfore; neverthelesse I marvell greatly that your mastership
wrote not to me, comaunding me to doe you some service at
London. Sir, you know my mynd and service, and I am right sory
and any synister wayes of my adversaryes be shewed unto you, and
not of my deserving; if yt be so, your wryting had bene to me
more comfortable then much goods, considryng althings done
aforetyme. Such as be your adversaryes in your old matters hath
bene with me at London, Master Bryan Roclife, Palmes and
Topclyffe, comyning and desyring further to proced in our
matters; and saying, ye clame suyt, service and seute, of ther
maner of Colthorpe, and for the same merce him in your court at
Plompton: if yt be so, in my mynd yt is necessary to aske,
distreyne, and levie the sayd amerciments. Pleaseth it your
mastership in my most humble wyse to recomend me unto my good
ladyes, and to my power service, as I have bene and ever wylbe
to my lyfes end, as more at the larg the brynger of this shall
shew unto you by mouth, to whom I pray you give credence. In
short space ye shall know more for the
<P 44>
best, with the grace of (^Jesu^) , who your mastership preserve.
At London, the last day of June.
   Your humble servant, Edward Plompton.
[\30 June 1483.\]

<Q PLU 1483 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 44>
[} [\LETTER VI.\] }] 
(^To the right honorable and worshipfull my singuler good
master, Sir Robart Plompton, knyght, these be delivered.^)
   The most humble and due recomendations premysed, pleaseth
your mastership to recomend me unto my singuler good lady your
moder, and my lady your wyfe; humble praying your good
mastership to take no displeasure with me that I sent not to you
afore this, as my duety was. People in this country be so
trobled in such comandment as they have in the Kyngs name and
otherwyse, marvellously, that they know not what to doe. My lord
Strayng
<P 45>
goeth forth from Lathum upon munday next with x m=l=. men,
whether we cannot say. The Duke of Buck: has so mony men, as yt
is sayd here, that he is able to goe where he wyll; but I trust
he shalbe right withstanded and all his mallice: and els were
great pytty. Messengers commyth dayly, both from the Kings grace
and the Duke, into this country. In short space I trust to se
your mastership; such men as I have to do with, be as yet
occupied with my sayd lord. Sir, I find my kinsmen all well
dysposed to me; if your mastership wyll comand me any service, I
am redy and ever wylbe to my lifes end, with the grace of
(^Jesu^) , who ever preserve you. Wrytten at Aldclife, uppon St.
Luke day.
   Your most humble servant, Ed. Plompton.
[\18 Oct. 1483.\]

<Q PLU 1482? H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 45>
[} [\LETTER VII.\] }] 
(^To my right hartely beloved cousin, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved cousin, I commend me unto you. And
wheras I conceive, that wheras award was ordred in the matter of
variance depending betwixt John Polleyn on the one partie, and
Georg Tankard with other taking his parte on the other party, I
am enformed that the said parties bene now at traverse in that
behalfe, contrary to such derections as were taken. I, willing
the pacefying and reformation herof by the advyse of you and
other of my counsell, desire and pray you, Cousin, at your
comyng to me at Yorke uppon thursday next comyng, to cause the
sayd Georg and the other persones to com with you; and that ye
shew your good will for the performance herof, as my very trust
is in
<P 46>
you, whom God kepe. Written in my Castell of Wresell, the xiiij
day of Februarie.
   Your Cosin, Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1486 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 50>
[} [\LETTER XII.\] }] 
(^To my singuler good master, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   After most due recomendacions had, pleaseth your mastership
in my most lowly wyse to recommend me unto my singuler good
<P 51>
lady. Sir, this day com Wylliam Plompton to labor for Haveray
Parke, and brought to me nether byll, wrytteng, nor commandement
by words, nor token, fro your mastership; and therof I marvell,
considering that at your instaunce I suffered him to occupie the
same parke and office for this tyme: and for that cause I am not
in certente, whether ye be his good master or noo. Wherfore he
hath not spedd as he myght have done if your wrytting had com;
notwithstanding, yt is well. Sir, my lord kept his Easter with
my lord of Oxford at Laveham, and come to the King uppon fryday
last, and comes with the King to Yorke; and my lord of Darby
departeth from Notingham into Lancashire. Sir, therle of Oxford,
my lord Chamberleyn, with diverse other estates, cometh to the
King to Notingham, and so forth to Yorke, as more at large the
brynger shall shew to you by mouth. Sir, the first gift that my
lady of Syon gave to me, was a par of Jeneper beads 
(\pardonet\) , the which I have sent to you by the bringer; and
if I had a better thinge, I wold have sent it with as good a
will and harte: and any service that ye wyll comand me, I am
redy, as knoweth our Lord, who preserve you. At Lyncolne, the
iij day of Apryll.
   Your servant, Edward Plompton.
[\3 April 1486.\]

<Q PLU 1487 H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 54>
[} [\LETTER XVI.\] }] 
(^To my right trusty and welbeloved cousin Sir Robart Plompton,
kt.^)
   Cousin Sir Robart, I commend me unto you; and wher it is so
that diverse gentlemen and other commoners, being within your
office at this tyme, hath rebelled against the king, as well in
ther being at this last felde, as in releving of them that were
against the Kings highnes, I therfore on the kings behalfe
strictly charg you, and on myne hartely pray you, for your owne
discharg and
<P 55>
myne, that ye incontinently after the sight hereof, take all
such persones as be within your office, which this tyme hath
offended agaynst the King, and in especiall John Pullen and
Richard Knaresborough: and that ye keepe them in the castell of
Knarsbrough, in suer keepeing, to the tyme be ye know the kings
pleasure in that behalfe. And that this be not failed, as ye
love me; and to give credence unto this bearer, and God keep
you. Written at Richmound, the xxiii day of Juyn. Se that ye
faile not, as ye love me, within the time, and as ever ye thinke
to have me your good lord, and as ever I may trust you.
   Your Cousin, Hen: Northumberland.
[\23 June 1487.\]

<Q PLU 1487? H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 56>
[} [\LETTER XIX.\] }] 
(^To my right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton,
knight.^)
   Right trusty and welbeloved Cousin, I gret you hartyly well.
And wheras I conceive that ye prepared yourselfe to have ridden
with me to this day of trewe, and now remembring, that
<P 57>
it were not only to your great labor, but also to your cost and
great charg, therfore I take me oonly to your good wyll and
thankfull disposition, for the which I hartely thanke you, and
am right well content and pleased that ye remaine still at home.
Written at Derham, the xix day of November.
   Your Cousin, Hen. Northumberland.
[\19 Nov. 1486-7.\]

<Q PLU 1489 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 59>
[} [\LETTER XXII.\] }] 
(^To my master, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   In my most humble and faythfull wyse I recommend me unto your
mastership, and to my singuler good lady. This day in the
mornyng I spake with my master Gascoyne at Poymfrett, and he
comended him to you and to my lady; and then I spake with Sir
Rich. Tunstall, and had great commyning with him of (\per et
contra\) . Sir, I wold advise your mastership cause William
Scargell to take good regard to himselfe and not to use his old
walkes; for and he doe, he wylbe taken, and brought to fynd such
surety for peace and otherwise, as shalbe to him inconvenient:
notwithstanding, the said Master Tunstall gave to me right
curteouse words at my departing; but therto is no great trust.
For the tyme it is good to dreed the worst, insomuch as the land
lyeth in his rule, in the honor of Poymfret. Sir, as for such
matters I had with
<P 60>
Robert Lenthorpe, he will give me no perfitt answere unto the
begining of the terme; in the meantyme he will speak with a
doctor, and send to me a letter to London by one Watkinson of
Poymfrett, atturney of the common place, and then your
mastership shalbe answered of the premises, with Gods grace, who
ever the same preserve in prosperouse felicitie long tyme to
endure. From Poymfrett, the xi day of January.
   Your humble servant, Edward Plompton.
[\9 Jan. 1488-9.\]

<Q PLU 1489 H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 61>
[} [\LETTER XXV.\] }] 
(^To my right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cosin, I comannd me unto you, and for
right weighty consideration me moving concerning the pleasure of
the Kings highnes, on the behalve of his grace, charg you, and
on my desire pray you, that ye with such a company, and as many
as ye may bring with your ease, such as ye trust, having bowes
and arrowes, and pryvy harnest, com with my nepvew, Sir William
Gascougne, so that ye be with me upon munday next comeing at
nyght, in the towne of Thirske; not failing herof, as my
speciall trust is in you, and as ye love me. Written in my
mannor of Semar, the xxiiii day of Aprill.
   Your Cousin, Hen. Northumberland.
[\24 April 1489.\]

<Q PLU 1499 GBEATON>
<A GODFREY BEATON>
<G M>
<P 63>
[} [\LETTER XXIX.\] }] [^TO SIR ROBERT PLUMPTON^]
(^To the worshipfull in God Master Plompton, knight, these
letters be delivered in hast.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, I comand me to you, beyng glad to here
of your welfaire. Sir, I hartely thank you for my tennaunts of
<P 64>
Arkenden, praying you of good contynuance, and also for your
wryting, the which ye send unto me towching to the lands of myne
in Arkenden. Sir, I have sent to you by my servant, Thomas
Morton, the copie of my evydents of the ix acres of land, the
which they clame intrest for the King. And I trust that I have
sent to you such wrytting as shall discharg that matter. Sir, I
pray you that ye will shew my matters according to right; and
after your good mynd, for I remytt all unto your good wysdome.
Sir, yt is so that I am a yong beginner of the world in my
office; and Sir, for your good will and counsell I will that my
officer reward to you yerly vi=s=. viii=d=. as was rewarded to
other men afor tyme, praying you of your good contynuance, and
any thing as I can, I will, as knoweth God, who have you in his
blessed keeping. Amen. Written at Lilleshull, the xxvi day of
May.
   Your loving frind, The Abbot of Lillishull.

<Q PLU 1491? RFITZJOHN>
<A ROBERT FITZJOHN>
<G M>
<P 64>
[} [\LETTER XXX.\] }] 
(^To the right worshipfull Sir Robart Plompton, kt. be this
letter delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, I recomend me unto you, thanking you,
as hartely as I can, for your great kyndnes and gentlenes shewed
to me, and to my poore tennaunts in Arkenden. And wheras ye have
written to me that one Robart Walkinham is injuried and wronged
of his tennor in Arkenden, contrarie to right and concience;
wherfore I purposse, sonne after Whitsontide next comyng, to
send a brother of myne and other officers to Arkenden, and ther
to have a court to be houlden, and right to be had according
<P 65>
to reason and good concience, with the grace of God, who have
you in his governance. Written in hast on Tewsday in the ii=d=
weeke of lent.
   Your good lover, The Abbot of Lilleshill.

<Q PLU 1492 RFITZJOHN>
<A ROBERT FITZJOHN>
<G M>
<P 65>
[} [\LETTER XXXI.\] }] 
(^To Sir Robart Plompton, kt. in Yorkshire, be this letter
delivered in good speede.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, we recomennd us unto you. And so it is
that dame Joyes Percy hath shewed unto the Earle of
Schrewesburie, which is our very good lord, and tender lord in
all our rightfull causes, how ye enwrong her of certayne lands
lying within our lordship of Erkenden, were ye be our steward;
wherein the said lord hath made labor unto us for the sayd Dame
Joyes, and desired us that we wold she be not wronged in hir
right: and considering how good lord he hath bene, and yet
alwayes unto us ys, and remembryng allso, that we, being men of
the holy church, owe not to suffer any wrong to be done to any
maner of persones within our Lordship, may no lesse doo but
effectually tender the sayd lords desire in that behalfe.
Wherfore we desire you, that ye will see the sayd Dame Joyes to
have all that which she of right ought to have within our
Lordship of Erkenden foresayd, so as she find hir not greved,
nor have cause to make any more labor to the sayd lord for hir
remedy therin. For and she doe,
<P 66>
we must sett some other person in your rome, that will not wrong
hir; for we may in no wyse abyd the displeasur of the sayd lord.
Tendering therfore this our desire, as we trust you; and our
Lord have you in his governance. From Lillishull, the xxviii day
of May.
   Your good loving Abbot of Lilleshull.

<Q PLU 1488? R2EYRE>
<A ROBERT EYRE II>
<G M>
<P 69>
[} [\LETTER XXXVI.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull master, Sir Robart Plompton, kt. this
bill be delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, I recomend me unto your mastership;
please it you witt, that I understand that my cousin, Ralfe
Hawgh, sendeth to your mastership for such dues as was granted
to his mother and to him, by my master your father, and you,
under your seales; the which writting and your seales, to come
before men of worship and discretion, I am certayne, when ye se
him, will not be denyed: for your seals be well knowne, and to
show in money other matters in this contry, the which are of
great charge. Wherwith, it please your mastership, that after my
poore advice, take a direction with him at this tyme; for it
will els be proces turne to more cost, and that wold I be right
sory fore. From Padley, on Sunday next before St. Mary day in
Lent.
   From yours, Robart Eire.
[\anno circiter 1488.\]

<Q PLU 1489 R2EYRE>
<A ROBERT EYRE II>
<G M>
<P 69>
[} [\LETTER XXXVII.\] }] 
(^To the right honorable and my especiall good master, Sir
Robart Plompton, knight, be this letter delivered.^)
   After all due recomendations had, please it youre mastership
to witt that Ralfe Haugh, according to the agrement and award
betwixt you and him made, hath delivered into my hands all such
<P 70>
evydence as he hath concernyng your mastership, endefferently to
be kept unto such tyme as a sufficyent and lawfull estate be
made unto the sayd Ralfe of a yerly rent of v mark, for terme of
life of the sayd Ralfe; that is to say, a feoffament of trust
indented made by your mastership unto me and other of the maner
of Darley with the appurtenances, and a letter of atturney
according to the same; also ii obligations, one of ccc marke and
another of x=li=. Wherfore I besech you to be good master, and
to make him a lawfull estate acording to the award, at which
tyme all the sayd evydence shalbe delivered unto your hands, or
to your assigne, and if ther be any service or pleasure that I
may doe, it shalbe done at my power, by Gods grace, who ever
preserve you body and soule. Written at Padley, the iiijth day
of August last past.
   Your owne,
   Robart Eyre, squire.
[\4 Aug. 1489.\]

<Q PLU 1490? EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 70>
[} [\LETTER XXXVIII.\] }]
(^To my lady, Dame Jane Plompton, at Plompton.^)
   Madame, in my most humble wyse I recomend me unto your good
Ladyship, and let you wyte that I have spoken with Master
Receyvor; iiij houres space he tarryed me, and he is right
lovingly disposed in every thing toward my master and all his,
if he have, or may have cause therto: and thus I have left with
him to be at
<P 71>
Knarsbrough, the wednesday next after saynt Eline day. And ther,
or afore that tyme, if they mete, to do his dutie to my master
curtesly, and after that, to be as favorable, and to shew his
good wyll to my sayd master in every thing he may doe, as we
wyll desire; and then I purpose with Gods grace to be there. And
afore the langage that Alan shold say, it is not so; he sayd
none such langage. The mylner told Alan that his farme was redy,
and if yt so be, I pray you cause the mylner to deliver it to
Benson, and if not, to make yt redy agaynst the Receyver come
thither; for this I have promysed, and unto that tyme we mete, I
besech you speake to my master, that no uncurtes dealing be had
with none of his servants. Also ther is a ax that my master
clameth the keeping of; I pray you let them have and occupie the
same unto the same tyme, and then we shall take a dereccion in
every thing, as well in the premyses, as otherwyse, to my
masters pleasure and entent, with Gods grace, who preserve you
and him both, and all yours.
   Fro Habberforth, this present Thursday.
   Your most humble servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
[\anno circiter 1489-90.\]

<Q PLU 1488? H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 72>
[} [\LETTER XLI.\] }] 
(^To my right hartely beloved Cousin Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cousin, I commennd me unto you; and
wheras I conceive that ther is a grudge depending betwixt you
and Sir William Beckwith, knight, I, entending the peacifiyng
thereof, desire and pray you to forbere and contynue to do any
<P 73>
thing in that behalfe against the sayd Sir William unto my next
commyng into Yorkshire. And then, I shall shew me in such wyse
for the reformacion therof, as I trust shall agre with right law
and conscience. Wherefore I pray you to conforme you to the
accomplishment herof, as my very trust is in you. I have wrytten
in like wise unto the sayd Sir William. That now God conserve
you. Wrytten in my castell of Warkworth, the xvi day of July.
Over this, Cousin, ye shall understand, that the sayd Sir
William Beckwith will committ him unto my rule in all behalves,
and therfore I pray you to se the premysses performed.
   Your Cousin
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1499 H5PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 5TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 73>
[} [\LETTER XLII.\] }] 
(^To my Right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved freind, I commend me unto you, and pray
you to apply your comyng unto me, according unto such order as
was taken of late tofore your departure from me; and that ye
faile not hereof, as my very trust is in you. Written in my
Castell of Wresull, the xx day of Januarie.
   Yore Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1487? H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 73>
[} [\LETTER XLIII.\] }] 
(^To my Right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cosin, I commend me unto you, and
<P 74>
for certaine considerations me movyng, I will and desire you
that ye incontynent after the sight hereof, cum hether unto me,
all excuses and delayes laid a part, that it be in nowise
failed, as ye intend the pleasure of the Kings highnes, and as
ye love me. Written in my mannor of Lekingfield, the vi day of
Aprill.
   Your Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1489? H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 74>
[} [\LETTER XLIV.\] }] 
(^To my Right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   Right trusty and welbeloved cousin, I commennd me unto you,
and desire and pray you that in such things as my right intierly
beloved Cosin, Mary Gascougne, hath to doe with you, as touching
hir right of herytaunce, that ye will give unto hir ayde and
supportance, as right law and conscience will, as my speciall
trust is in you, whom God keep. Written in my mannor of Semar,
the first day of Aprill.
   Your loving Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1499? H5PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 5TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 74>
[} [\LETTER XLV.\] }] 
(^To my Right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton,
knight.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cousin, I commennd me unto you, and
desire and pray you to cause suer search to be made, what horse
and cattaille ther be, that goes in my spring within my parke at
<P 75>
Spofford; and such as can be found their, I pray you to se them
dryven and voyded out therof: and also henceforth, that ye will
se neither horse nor cattell goe within my said spring, as my
speciall trust is in you, whom God preserve. Written in my
mannor of Semar, the ij day of Aprill. Over this, Cousin, I
hartely pray you to se my said parke vewed, and that the dere
within the same may be easily delt withall, and what remaines
within the same I pray you to certefie me, after the said vew be
taken.
   Yor loving Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1499? H5PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 5TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 75>
[} [\LETTER XLVI.\] }] 
(^To my Right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cousin, I commennd me unto you. And
wheras I of late hath had in ward two servaunts of Thomas
Myddleton, for hunting within my parke of Spofford, which I send
unto you by my servant, Richard Saxston, praying you therfore,
<P 76>
to take an obligation of them, and two sufficient men bounden
with them in the sume of xx=li=, to be of good bearing and in
law themselfes uppon viii dayes warning, whensoever I send for
them; not failing herof as my singuler trust is in you, whom God
keepe. Written in my mannor of Semar, the xxvii day of March.
Over this, Cosin, I hartely thanke you in executing my
commaundement.
   Your Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1499? H5PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 5TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 76>
[} [\LETTER XLVII.\] }] 
(^To my Right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton,
knight.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cousin, I commennd me unto you. And
wheras variance and discord is dependyng betwixt my servant,
Thomas Saxston, and Richard Ampleford, of my Lordshipe of
Spofford, the cause wherof, as I am enformed, hath bene, or
this, shewed unto you; and if it hath not, I desire and pray you
reply to exammaen it, and therupon to shew your lovyng
diligence, not onely to se the peace kept in this behalfe, but
also to sett the sayd parties at agrement, so that this matter
may be pacefied. And for asmuch as ye have the rule ther under
me, I pray you to shew you of semblable disposicion, if any
matter of varience hereafter happen within your sayd rule; so
that the parties sue not to me, if ye by your discret wysdome
can reforme it, as my very trust is in you: and in your thus
doyng, ye shall shew unto me thankfull pleasure. That knoweth
God, who preserve you. Written in my castell of Warkworth, the
xv day of June. Cousin, I pray you to se this matter pacefied,
that there be no more calling upon me therfore, as my very trust
is in you.
   Yore Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1488? H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 81>
[} [\LETTER LII.\] }] 
(^To my right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cousin, I commennd me unto you,
thanking you for my servant Rich. Greene; and desire and pray
you, that if Bastard Aldborgh, Richard Leds, or such other as of
late, as I am enformed, have made revery and withdrawen goods,
contrayrie to the Kings lawes, within the lordship of
Knarsbrough, where at ye have rule, can be come by, ye committ
them to ward within the castell of Knarsbrough, therin still to
remayne unto that ye have further knowledg of my pleasure in
this behalfe. Over this, Cousin, where as I have assigneed my
servant William Bullocke to levy and receive such rents and
fermes, and also arrerages, as are due and growen of the lands
that late were William Aldburgh', wherin ye and I, with other,
stand infeoffed, and to be reserved to that my pleasure therin
be understanden. I therfore desire and pray you, if any person
would interupt him in thexecution herof, ye will shew your good
will in the lawfull defending therof, and also in the geting of
all such hay as is upon the sayd ground; not fayling herof as my
speciall trust is in you, whom God kepe. Written in my Castell
of Werkworth, the xxxi day of July.
   Your Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1487? H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 86>
[} [\LETTER LIX.\] }] 
(^To my right trusty and welbeloved Cousin Sir Robart Plompton,
kt.^)
   Right trusty and welbeloved Cousin, I grete you hartely well.
And if you have suffered any person, that was under your ward,
within the Castell of Knarsbrough, to be delivered at the desire
of Sir Thomas Wortley, Kt., I lett you witte that I am not
therewith contented. Wherfore, Cousin, see that this be
reformed, and not to suffer any person within the said Castell
to depart thence, unto that ye have knowledg of the pleasure of
the Kings highnes, or from me; as my speciall trust is in you,
whom God kepe. Written in thabbey of Funtayns, the xxvi day of
Juyn.
   Your Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1488? H4PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 4TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 86>
[} [\LETTER LX.\] }] 
(^To my right hartely beloved Cosin, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cousin, I commennd me unto you, and
desire and pray you to caus a bucke of season to be taken,
within the
<P 87>
forest of Knarsbrough under your rule, to be delivered unto this
bearer, to the behaufe of the mawer of the Cyte of Yorke and his
bredren, and this my writting shalbe your warrant. Wherfore I
pray you that this be thankfully served, as my speciall trust is
in you, whom God keepe. Written in my manor of Lekinfeild, the
xxviii day of Juyn.
   Yor Cousin,
   Hen. Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1489 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 87>
[} [\LETTER LXI.\] }] 
(^To my master, Sir Robart Plompton, knight.^)
   Pleaseth your mastership, after all due recomandacion, to
wyte that this day was hanged at the tower hill iiij servants of
the Kings; wherfore, the brynger herof can shew to you by mouth.
Other newes, as yet, here is none. Sir, afore your indentures of
Mr. Chaunceler, he maketh none unto Candlemesse next, and then
he will have a generall awdite, where ye, and all other, shall
have your lesses out; and in the meane tyme, every man to ocupie
ther owne farmes, notwithstanding the premysses: put ye no doubt
therin,
<P 88>
for ye shalbe sure therof, assone as any man of his. I have
spoken with Nicholas Lenthorpe, and fele him well dispossed
toward you. Sir, if ye send therfore at Candlemasse, send to Mr.
Hemson, by the token, I gat him a warrant for a doo of my lord
in his parke of Hals yerely. If it please you to assigne me,
send me word what increse and approment ye wyll give, and I wyll
applie my mynd and service to your pleasure and wele. Sir, I
purpose to se your mastership, or to send this Cristinmase, if I
may goe home. This day my lord knoweth not whether he goeth home
afore this tyme, or noo. If we goe home, I wyll send; if not, I
pray you send to me afore Candlemasse. Remember Clement Simpson.
Pleaseth your mastership to recomend me to my singuler good
lady. And your owne faythfull servant, as knoweth our Lord, who
preserve you. Wrytten at London, the xvij day of December.
   Your humble servant,
   Edward Plompton.
[\17 Dec. 1489.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 89>
[} [\LETTER LXII.\] }] 
(^To the right honorable my especyall good master, Sir Robart
Plompton, kt.^)
   After the most humble and due recomendation had, please yt
your mastership, that in the most humble lowly wyse I may be
recomended unto my singuler good ladies; praying you to have me
excused in that I send no wyld fole to you afore this tyme, for
in all Lancashire cold none be had for none money. The snaw and
frost was so great, none was in the country, but fled away to
see; and that caused me that I sent not, as I promysed. Sir,
Robart, my servant, is a true servant to me, neverthelesse he is
large to ryde afore my male, and over weyghty for my horse;
wherfore he hartely desireth me to wryte to your mastership for
him. He is a true man of tongue and hands, and a kind and a good
man. If yt please your mastership to take him to your service, I
besech you to be his good master, and the better at the
instaunce of my especyall prayer. Sir, I have given to him the
blacke horse that bar him from the feild; and if ther be any
service that ye will comand me, I am redy, and wilbe to my lives
end at your comandement, all other lordship and mastership layd
aparte. My lord kepeth a great Cristinmas, as ever was in this
country, and is my especyall good lord, as I trust in a short
tyme your mastership shall know. My simple bedfelow, your
bedewoman and servant, in the most humble wyse recomendeth hir
unto your mastership, and to my ladys good ladyship, and your
servants; as knoweth (^Jesu^) , who preserve you. Wrytten at
Lathum, the iij. day of January.
   Your most humble servant, Ed. Plompton, sectory to my lord
Straung.
[\3 Jan. 1489-90.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 90>
[} [\LETTER LXIII.\] }] 
(^To my master, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   In my most humble and faythfull wyse I recomend me to your
good mastership, and to my especyall good ladyes. Sir, at my
departing I rode according to your comandement by my lady
Delphes, a full trobleous way in that great snaw;
notwithstanding, I cold not speed of your matters at that tyme.
But now she is at London, and promyses me well; the which I
trust, as yet, shall speed, afore your atturney come to London,
within this vi dayes. He cometh ever at the last Retorne, in the
end of the terme; that causeth me to have more busines than
nedeth. Your matter in the Excheker is grevous; there is iij
wryttes agaynst you.
<P 91>
Whereof, I have a (\dedimus potestatem\) out of the Escheker,
and another out of the Chauncre, both derected to Sir Guy
Fayrfax, to resayve your hothes and my ladyes. The serch and the
copy of the wrytts, out of one cort to another, costeth much
money, and the fees of them, and great soliciting. If I had them
now redy, I wold have sent them to you; when they be, I pray God
send to me a good messinger, or els I must neds send my servant.
Afore the iij=th= wrytte, for the entre into Wolfhountlands, all
the counsell that I can gett, can shew no way, as yet, necessary
for you; save onely I have labored the wrytt proceding agaynst
you to be reteyned unto the next terme, and in the meane tyme to
purvey our remedy. Fech your pardon and my ladyes, and send them
both; for without they will helpe us, I wote not well what to
doe in the matter. Incontinent upon the comyng home of master
Farfax, ye and my lady ride to his place with your wrytts, for
so I am agreed with him; and as hastely as ye can gett down,
send up the sayd wrytts with his sertyfycat, for then we must
have a (\non molestando\) out of the Chauncery to discharges.
The premysses maketh my purse light; to wryte partyclarly the
charges, I have no tyme now. Bylby taketh to me no money;
neverthelesse when I have, or may make any, your matters shall
not slake, nor abate, unto such tyme as your mastership send, as
is above sayd. All other matters concerning you to the Kyngs
grace and his counsell, I can send to you no word therof as yet.
I trust in short space to doe, with Gods grace, who preserve
you. Wrytten in great hast, the x day of Feb.
   Your most humble servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
[\10 Feb. 1489-90.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 92>
[} [\LETTER LXIV.\] }] 
(^To my singuler good master, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   In my most humble and faythfull mynd I recomend me unto your
good mastership, and to my especyall good ladyes; certyfiing
your mastership, that I delivered to Sir Richard Thornton,
prest, upon Sunday last, to bryng to you, a box sealed, and ther
in ij wrytts, one (\dedimus potestatem\) out of the Chauncere,
and another out of the Excheker, both derected to Sir Guy
Fairfax, and my poore wrytting therwith, the which was right
simple, but I besech you have me excused. Though I wryte not at
all tymes, as my dutie is to do, Sir, I had never so great
busines as I have now for your matters. I know not the causes,
but much payne I had to avoyd your appearance in your proper
person, as ye shall more at large know by mouth, when I shall
speake with you; that shalbe at your comandement. Hall demanded
of me grene wax, that I knew not of, and I desired of hym a
byll, what he asked of you, and his bokes wanted, he cold give
me none; but I trust he wyll not be hasty upon you therfore, and
if he be, let Henry Fox speake with him in my name, and pray him
to suffer unto my comyng home. I made to him such chere as I
cold at London. I have found meanes to convey the wryt, shold
goe to the Schereffe of Notinghamshire agaynst you, unto the
next terme; then Gode send us good speede therwith. Afore
Easter, send upp your pardons, wrytes of (\dedimus\) , and
escaptes of instruccion what plee we shall make for you in the
Excheker, of, and how, and wherby ye enter your lands and maketh
clame; the matter is litle, and ioyus, with
<P 93>
Gods grace, I purpose to be ever all this vacacion, and unto the
next terme. I send to you a letter by Robert Beckwith, and more
of every thing concerning you and your servants your atturney
can shew. I wold, if I myght by wyshe, speak with you one houre,
and yt pleased (^Jesu^) , who preserve your mastership in
prosperous long to endure. Wrytten at London, the xx day of
Febr. My lord Straunge came to the Kings grace uppon Munday
last; my lord of Northumberland is in good health, blessed be
(^Jesu^) . Please yt your mastership to commend me to my master
Gascoyn, if I cold doe to his mastership any service in thes
partes, I wold be glad. Robert Blackwall hath sent to you a
pattent to seale, as appereth by the same, shewing to him your
pleasure of vi=s= viii=d= by yere; and that he toke to no
regard: the world is so covettus, I wott not what to say, nor
nought I wyll, (\parum sapienti sufficyt\) .
   Your servant,
   Ed: Plompton.
[\20 Feb. 1489-90.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 93>
[} [\LETTER LXV.\] }] 
(^To the right honorable and my especyall good master, Sir
Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   In my most humble and faythfull wyse I recomend me unto
<P 94>
your good mastership, and to my especyall good ladys. Sir, the
iij day of May I received your wrytting, and incontinent I
labored to David, and spake with him according to your desire;
and ther is great labour made to him for to put you from Haveray
parke, and offered to him x=li= by yere, and a reward of c=s=.
Notwithstanding, I have made such labor; and caused him to be
agreable to let yt to you for vi yeare, viii=li= by yeare, and
ye to send vi marke to him at Whytsonday next to London, and
then and ther ye to have your indentures sealed and delivered,
and ye to enter and begine the vi yeare to you and your
assignes. Sir, David wrytteth to you in favor of Wylliam
Plompton bastard, and for his excuse; and all is but a collor,
for doubtles, and I had not layd yt to David discretely dyverse
wayes, yt had bene gone from you, for I mad many meanes, or he
wold make to me any grant: and because your mastership wrote
that ye wold not for xx=li= but ye had yt, according to my
dutye, I diligently applyed it to accomplish your pleasure
therin. Sir, afor the arbage, dout yt not; for sir Henry
Wentforth, nor yet none other, can have it, nor nothinge that
belongeth to David. Sir, yt is well done ye remember to send
this money, and have your indenturs in all hast possible, and if
ther be anything that I know not, that ye wold have comprised
within the same indenture, send to me word. Sir, I marvell much
of William Plompton, that he sayth that I am not true. I never
did him harme, but at your comandement I have done
<P 95>
much for him. Yt is no marvell he that is not naturall, that he
cannot love and owe his service to you, though he love not me. I
trow, he love all ill that is faythfull and true to you. Sir,
what soever any man say, I am, and wilbe, to you and yours true
and faythfull while I live, with Gods grace, who preserve you.
From Furnyswall, (\vi die\) May.
   Your humble servant,
   Edward Plompton.
[\6 May 1490.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 95>
[} [\LETTER LXVI.\] }] 
(^To the right honorable my singuler good master, Sir Robart
Plompton, Knight.^)
   In my most humble wyse I recommend me unto your mastership,
and to my singuler good ladys. Late ye wrote to me a letter, the
which I received upon Whitsonday at nyght, touching the
departing of Sir Henry Wentworth; and incontinent upon yt, I
toke a bote, and went to Grenewich, and shewed the matters to my
lord of Derby; and he appoynted me to attend uppon him unto he
spake with the King, and so I did; and the Kings grace will in
no wyse that Sir Henry Wentworth departe from your country, as
more at larg I shall send you word in hast, when I have more
sure messinger. Sir, I pray you shew to my ladys
<P 96>
that Byrd of Knasbrough spake to me for certaine things to send
them; and he cold cary none, for he went to Hales and many other
pilgramages. Wryte in a byll such things as they wold have, and
send to me. Sir, ye have a faythfull frynd and servant of Davy
ap-i-Kriffith, but I marvell that ye sent not the mony at
Pentycost. I am douted that he vary from his grant, ther is so
great labor made to him for Havarey. Notwithstanding his letter
send to you in the favor of W=m=. Plompton, I am through with
him affor my lord of Derby, that ye shall occupie, and put and
depute under you whosoever ye wyll, at your pleasure; and so
shall your indentures be made, ye observing all covenauntes. And
ever your owne to my pore power, as knoweth our Lord, who your
good mastership, and my good ladys, with all yours, preserve.
From London, (\crastino Corporis\) .
   Your most humble servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
[\11 June 1490.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 97>
[} [\LETTER LXVII.\] }] 
(^To my master, Sir Robart Plompton, knight.^)
   In my most humble wyse I recomend me unto your mastership,
and to my especyall good lades. Sir, I marvell much that your
mastership sendeth not the iiij=li= for David; he made to you a
grant conditionally that ye shold content and pay to him at
London iiij=li= at Pentycost last past, wheruppon ye sent to me
a byll that he shold be payd at Mydsommer, and to content his
mynd I shewed to him your letter; what I shall say to him, or
what excuse to make, I cannot tell. Sir, remember ye may have
his parke, xl=s= yerly under the price, by my labor; and if he
change and let yt to another, blame not me: I have done my duty.
William Plompton hath bene at London with David, and made much
labor agaynst you for his fee; and otherwyse, shewed to me a
copy of a state and feftment, mad by my master your father to
certaine feofes, to his beofe, of lands and tenementes to the
value of x mark yerly, for terme of his lyfe, the remaynderie to
the ryght heire of William Plompton knight: wherupon he intended
to labor a prive
<P 98>
seale to bring you before my lord Chaunceler and the Kings
counsell, the which I have stoped as yet. Sir, I pray you send
me word in all hast possible of your mynd in this matter, and in
especyall the money for David; and our Lord preserve you.
Wrytten in hele in great hast uppon St. Peter even. Sir, they
begine to die in London, and then I must departe for the tyme
and other men do. I wold make you sure of Awerrey, or I departe,
fro David.
   Your servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
[\28 June 1490.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 99>
[} [\LETTER LXX.\] }] 
(^To my master Sir Robart Plompton, knyght.^)
   In my most humble wyse I recomend me unto your good
mastership, and to my especyall good Lades. This day I have
spoken with master Schereffe, and ther I send Master Blakwall,
Master of the Chancery, as the berer can shew to you more by
mouth,
<P 100>
and they both comend them to you. Master Schereff hath and wyll
doe as much in your matter as I can of reason desire him. At
Nothingham, uppon Munday come a senit, must we fynd a office for
you. I have bene with Thomas Horton, by the advice of Mr.
Schereffe, and pennyt ij inquisicions of dyverse wayes; if one
will not serve us, the other shall. Sir, ye have a simple tenant
in Maunsfeld Woodhouse. I wold have sent him to Rich: Saxton,
for to mete with me at Mr. Schereffs, and he absent him. Any
service ye wyll comand me, send me word, and I am yours, as
knoweth our Lord, who preserve you. Wrytten at Southwell, the
xxiij of September.
   Your servant, Ed. Plompton.
[\23 Sept. 1490.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 100>
[} [\LETTER LXXI.\] }] 
(^To my master Sir Robart Plompton, knyght.^)
   In my most humble and lowly wyse I recomend me unto your
mastership, and to my singuler good lady. Sir, I sent to you
late wryttings of all matters by Sir Edward Bethom, prest. I
thinke long unto I here word from you, whether they come to you
in tyme, or noo, and of your welfare. Sir, I had no word seth I
parted from Plompton, as many as hath comyn to London. I cannot
gyt myne entent of my lady Delphes, wherfore I have comyned with
Masters Blunt and Shefeld in this forme; the say they will take
yt in ferme, or els make yt exchaunce with you of lands lyeing
in Yorkshire, or els pay to you redy money therfore; which of
thes iij wayes ye wyll take, I pray you take good advise, and
send to me word as hastyly as ye can, for they will not tary
here; and I will have no further comunycation therin, tyll I
know your pleasure and mynd, for they wyll take hold at a letle
<P 101>
thing. All such newes as I here, John Bell can shew ye by mouth,
for he made so great hast, I had no leasure to writt more at
larg of al things at this tyme. I thinke long till I here from
your mastership, the which (^Jesu^) preserve. At London, the
iiij day of November.
   Your most humble servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
[\4 Nov. 1490.\]

<Q PLU 1490 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 101>
[} [\LETTER LXXII.\] }] 
(^To my master Sir Robart Plompton, knyght.^)
   "The replycacion of Margret Scargill to the answere of
William Scargill. The same Margrett sayth, that the byll put by
her agaynst the sayd William is good and true in every poynt,
and that the same John Scargill, named in the sayd byll, made
such wyll of the same maner, landes, tenements and other
premyses, and every of them, as is surmytted by the same byll;
and over that, sayth althings as in the saydbyll is surmytted:
all which matter she is redy to prove, as this cort will award,
and prayeth as in hir byll is desired."
   Sir, in my right humble and tender wyse I recomend me unto
your good mastership, and to my singuler good ladyes. Sir, I
sent to you the copie of the replycacion of Margaret Scargill,
wherupon my lord Chaunceler hath, at our speciall desire, comand
a (\Dedimus potestatem\) to Sir Guy Fayrfax, to heare and examyn
ther proves and ours both, in Yorkshire; wherfore I wold advise
your mastership to shew your copies of ther byll, our answere,
and there replicacion to Mr. William Fayrfax, that he may be
perfitt by them, and your instruccion in the matter, and to be
for William Scargyll afore Master Sir Guy, at that day of
<P 102>
his sytting, with all other proves most necessary for him; and
in any wyse se that William Scargill agre with Watson, and bryng
him up with him to London to release his suerty for the peace,
or else he must fynd other suertyes, and that is costly: and if
he fayle, he must go to ward, or els loose c marke, and every
one of hus iiij l marke, the which God forbyd shold be. Sir,
afore your lands in Crakenmarsh, I can not deale with my lady
Delfs; I find hir varyable in hir promyse; wherfore I have,
according to your comandment, letten them in your name to Mr.
Blunt by indenture, as more at larg appereth by the same, the
which I sent to you within this box inclosed under my seale; and
ye to subscrybe your hand, and to send a servant of yours with
the same box and indentures to thabbay of Dale, and ther to se
thabbot and convent seale the obligation for suerty of your
rent, as in them is specified, and to wryt his name down to
deliver one parte to Mr. Blount, and retine another parte for
you with the obligation. All such matters as ye wrote for by
Georg Croft, dout not for them; I have and shall remember them
to thaccomplishment of your mynd, with grace of (^Jesu^) , who
you and yours long preserve in prosperous felicite to endure.
From London, the xxvij day of November.
   Your humble servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
[\27 Nov. 1490.\]

<Q PLU 1499? H5PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 5TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 106>
[} [\LETTER LXXVIII.\] }] 
(^To my right hartely beloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   Right hartely beloved Cosin, I comaund me unto you. And for
as much as I am distetute of runyng hounds, I desire and pray
you to send me a copple with my servant, this bringer. And of
thing like I have fore your pleasure, it shalbe redy. Written in
my lodging at Spetell of the street, the xxix day of October.
Over this, Cousin, I pray you to send me your tame haert, for
myne dere ar dead.
   Your Cousin, Hen: Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1495 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 112>
[} [\LETTER LXXXVII.\] }] 
(^To my master, Sir Robart Plompton, knight.^)
   In my right humble wyse I recomend me unto your good
mastership. I have receyved your wrytting and the credaunce of
your servant. And in stopping and letting of your prevy seale,
at the instance and especyall labour of my Master Gascoygne, my
lord Prevey Seale hath done that he myght with reason, insomuch
that he lettyt yt, and comaunded Mr. Bele, clark therof, that
none shold passe, unto such tyme as all the lords of the Kings
counsell commanded yt to passe, upon his surmyse and complaynt,
wherof I sent to you a copye. And when we sought no remedy, we
found the meanes that Ch. Kilborne, and sufficient suertyes with
him, shold be bonden in a reconusance of x=li= to content and
pay the cost and charg, if his surmyse and byll of complaint be
founden insufficyent and not true. My sayd Mr. Gascoygne hath
dyligently applyed your matter, as much as is possible for to
doe, as your servant Geffray can shew unto you more at large
every thing by mouth; and as yet he can get no surtyes. Wherfore
my lord abbot of St. Mary Abbay shewed to me this day, that his
servant Kilborne wold have a writ, (\subpena\) . Sir, for that
I have lade good watch. Also my lord abott told me this day,
that Edmound Thwaites hath sene his evedence, and sath that your
mylne standeth uppon his ground and more, and that he is not
your ward. Wherby I perceive well, he haught a favor and good
lordship to his servant Kilborne. He desired the matter to be
put
<P 113>
upon my lord of Surrey and him. And I answered, that the matter
concerned your inherytance, and a matter of land, the which cold
in no wyse be rightfully determyned without learned counsell.
Sir, I trust we shall so provide for him here, that he shal not
have all his intent, with Gods grace, who preserve your good
mastership, and my singuler good ladys, and all yours, long tyme
to endure with encrease of grace and honor. From Furnywalls
Inne, the xxvi of October 1495.
   Your humble servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
[\26 Oct. 1495.\]

<Q PLU 1496 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 113>
[} [\LETTER LXXXVIII.\] }] 
(^To my singular good master Sir Robart Plompton, knyght.^)
   In my right humble wyse I recomend me unto your good
mastership, and to my singuler good lady. Afore, my lord of
Carlel hath passed so by the way, at his lodging at Poumfret and
Scroby, that as yet I spake not with his lordship. I spake with
his servants, and they shewed to me Ch. Kilborn rideth not up
with him. Yt was shewed me that uppon Thursday last ther was a
great Justice sat at Wentbrig; I wold fayne know what was done
ther, and afore that, in such matters as concerned you. Master
Tailbose was at Colliweston uppon tuesday, wedensday, and
thursday last, as the
<P 114>
bringer can shew; els I wold have written much more. My lord of
Darby departith towards London upon munday come a senit. Davy
recomend him to your mastership, and when we come to London, ye
shall have a strayt restreynt for Haveray. Our lord preserve you
and all yours. At Stampforth, (\crastino Hallarii\) .
   Your humble servant, Ed. Plompton.
[\14 Jan. 1495-6.\]

<Q PLU 1496 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 116>
[} [\LETTER XCI.\] }] 
(^To my master Sir Robart Plompton, knight, at Plompton.^)
   In my right humble and harty wyse I recomend me unto your
good mastership, and to my singuler good lady. The ix day of
February I received your wrytting, the which was to me great
comforth. The contents therof was moved to my lord Prive seal
afore that, by Percyvall Lambeton, as he shewed to me, and as he
<P 117>
hath wrytten to you the scanty in every thing of my lords mynd
in that behalfe; the which, me semeth, right good and necessary
for you. And yt pleaseth you, when my lord cometh into your
country, to se him, and ride a myle or ij with him, and wellcome
him to the country; yt will doe good many wayes. Sir, afore
credaunce of Ewene Barle, he gave none to me but for these
premyses, and that, I thinke, nedeth no more labor nor cost; for
when my sayd lord had answered reasonable therin, yt sufficeth
for the same. Also I send herin a byll of discharg for your
fine, and I wold I myght have content the same fyne at the last
terme, [{but I spared for the more advauntage,{] for ye payd
none syth Trenetie terme unto now. And your owne, and ever
wylbe, to my power, as knoweth our Lord, who ever preserve you
and yours in prosperous long tyme to endure. From Furnywalls
Inn, the xiij of February.
   Your humble servant, Ed. Plompton.
[\13 Feb. 1495-6.\]

<Q PLU 1497 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 120>
[} [\LETTER XCIV.\] }] 
(^To my singuler good master, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   In my right humble wyse I recomend me unto your good
mastership, and to my singuler good lady; acertaynyng you that
ther is in thes partes a great talking, of those that belong and
medle
<P 121>
with Mr. Hemson, that he intendeth to attempt matters agaynst
you in the title of the heire of John Suttell. Wherin he moved
and brake the same unto Mr. Gascoyne, of whom he had a discret
and good answere, as thus. He desired my sayd Mr. Gascoyne to be
favorable to him in the premysses; and he answered to him, and
sayd thus: "if your matter were against any man in England
except my uncle, I wold take your parte; but in this ye must
have me excused," with dyvers words more concerning your honour
and wele. Sir, the sayd Mr. Hemson moved this matter greatly,
and maketh his frinds; and divers that he hath broken his hart
and mynd too, hath told me the same, and his saying afore,
<P 122>
as they knew. If yt plese your mastership, to cause your loving
frinds and servants to have knowledg therof. Sir, I shewed to a
gentleman, that is of counsell and fee with Master Hemson, and a
companyon of myne, how that Kyng Richard, in his most best tyme,
and the first yere of his reigne, having you not in the favor of
his grace, but utterly against you, caused them to have a parte
of your lands by his award and ryall power, contrary to your
agrement and all right conscience; the which I trust to God
wylbe called againe. Sir, ye have many good frinds and servants,
and moe, with Gods grace, shall have; this is the matter I
thinke no dout yn. Ye have a great treasour of Mr. Gascoyne. If
ther be any service your mastership wyll comand me, yt shalbe
done to the uttermost of my power, as knoweth our Lord, who
preserve you. Written in Furnyvalls Inne, the iij day of Feb.
1496.
   Your humble servant, Ed: Plompton.
[\3 Feb. 1496-7.\]

<Q PLU 1497 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 123>
[} [\LETTER XCVI.\] }] 
(^To my master, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   In my humble and most hartyest wyse I recomend me unto your
good mastership, and to my singuler good lady. Sir, yt is so
that certaine lovers and frinds of myne in London hath brought
me unto the sight of a gentlewoman, a wedow of the age of xl
yeres and more, and of good substance; first, she is goodly and
beautyfull, womanly and wyse, as ever I knew any, none other
dispraysed: of a good stocke and worshipful. Hir name is Agnes.
She hath in charg but one gentlewoman to hir daughter, of xii
yer age. She hath xx marc of good land within iij myle of
London, and a ryall maner buylded therupon, to give or sell at
hir pleasure. She hath in coyne in old nobles, c=li= - in
ryalls, c=li= - in debts, xl=li= - in plate, cx=li=, with other
goods of great valour; she is called worth m=li= beside hir
land. Sir, I am bold upon yor good mastership, as
<P 124>
I have ever bene; and if yt please God and you that this matter
take effect, I shalbe able to deserve althings done and past.
She and I are agreed in our mynd and all one; but hir friends
that she is ruled by, desireth of me xx marke jointor more then
my my lands come too; and thus I answered them, saying, "that
your mastership is so good master to me, that ye gave to my
other wyfe xii marke for hir joyntor in Stodley Roger, and now,
that it wyll please your sayd mastership to indue this woman in
some lordship of yours of xx marke duryng hir lyfe, such as they
shalbe pleased with: and for this my sayd frinds offer to be
bounden in m=li=." Sir, uppon this they intend to know your
pleasure and mynd prevely, I not knowing; wherfore, I humbly
besech your good mastership, as my especyall trust is and ever
hath bene above all earthly creatures, now for my great
promotion and harts desire, to answer to your pleasure, and my
wele and poore honesty; and I trust, or yt come to pase, to put
you suertie to be discharged without any charg: for now, your
good and discret answere may be my making. For, and she and I
fortune by God and your meanes togyther, our too goods and
substance wyll make me able to doe you good service, the which
good service and I, now and at all tymes, is and shalbe yours,
to joperde my life and them both. Sir, I besech your good
mastership to wryte to me an answere in all hast possible, and
after that ye shall here more, with Gods grace, who preserve you
and yours in prosperous felicyte longtyme to endure. Wrytten in
Furnywall Inne in Olborn, the ij day of March 1496.
   Your humble servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
[\2 March 1496-7.\]

<Q PLU 1497 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 124>
[} [\LETTER XCVII.\] }] 
(^To my singuler good master, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   In my right humble wyse I recomende me unto your good
mastership,
<P 125>
and to my singuler good lady, your wyfe; and wher it hath
pleased Almighty (^Jesu^) of his grace, by meanes of my lovers
and frinds, to bryng me to the sight and acquantance of a
gentlewoman in London, whose name is Agnes, late wife of Robert
Drayate, gentilman, who is a woman that God hath indued with
great grace and vertue. She is wyse and goodly, and of great
substance, and able for a better man then I am. Notwithstanding
it pleaseth, so that I myght content her frinds mynds for her
joyntor of xx marke by yere that they demand of me. My answare
is to them, that I have no lands but in revercion; and that yt
pleaseth your good mastership to give my last wyfe xii marke by
yeare out of your lands, and my especyall trust is, that it will
please your mastership, for my promotion, and in especyall for
my harts desir and wele, that faythfull is set upon this sayd
gentlewoman, to grant and make sure to hir a jointer of xx marke
yerely over all reprises, during her life. And I besech you so
to do, and that the berer herof may be certayne of your mynd in
the premysses, and also answere to them by your wrytting of the
same. This don, incontinent after Easter I trust in (^Jesu^) to
fynish this matter; for they demaund of me certayne lands and
goods, as more at large appereth within a byll here inclosed,
the which I observed in every poynt to thaccomplishment of ther
pleasures. Sir, you know I have no lands, nor lyving in
substaunce, but onely of you; and this hapen, I shall be more
able to do your mastership service. From London, in my sayd
master lodging, the x of March, 1496.
   Your humble servant,
   Ed. Plompton.
John Chasser of Lyncolnes.
Sir William Chamber, Chaplaine.
Edward Chesseman.
[\10 March 1496-7.\]

<Q PLU 1497 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 126>
[} [\LETTER XCVIII.\] }] 
(^To my singuler good master, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt.^)
   In my most humble wise I recomend me unto your good
mastership, and to my especyall good lady. Sir, I sent a letter
this last weke to you by James Colton, servant to Master
Gascoyne, to shew to your mastership my fortune at this tyme. If
your mastership be, (as I doubt no other in my mynd, nor with my
words to noble men of worship, but that ye be,) my good master,
the which hath, and ever shalbe, to your honour and profitt,
though I have afore this bene chargable to you, now, I trust in
God, as true and profitable to be, as ever I was, and much more,
and able to restore and amends make of all cost done to me afore
tyme. Sir, I besech you after your most discret mynd and wysdome
to answere this messenger, that shall com to you for this
jointor of xx marke, both in words and in your wrytting, so that
yt be to your honour, my poor honestie, and truth, and making in
this world; for uppon that answere lyeth my great wele, and if
yt were otherwyse, my utter undoing for ever, the which God
forbyde. Yt shall cost your mastership no peny more, nor charge
to you; for if your mastership say to him that ye are content,
and will grant and make to him this joyntor incontinent after
our marriage, when we two shall come to you, and so shew yt
lovingly to the sayd messenger, and in your wrytting to them
agayne, then all is done: for when I am maryed to her, thes men
that now are counsellers shall bere but litle rome. And
therfore, this is a matter of no charg, and to me great
promotion all maner of wayes. She is amyable and good, with
great wysdome and womanhead, and worth in land yerly xx marke
and more, to you at hir wyll, the which, I trust in God, shalbe
loving for you and yours in tyme to come for ever. Also in gold
and silver, coyned and uncoyned, D=li=, I thinke
<P 127>
veryly, as I perceyve by hir. Beside hir lands, in all she is
worth m=li= marke and more. She hath refused for my sake many
worshipfull men and of great lands; some of them hath offered to
hir xl=li= joyntor within London: notwithstanding, she is to me
singuler good mystres, as after this your mastership shall know.
This same day she gave to me a chayne of gold, with a crosse set
with a ruby and pearles, worth xx=li= and more. And because that
ther messinger shall bryng my letter with him that they se, for
I clossed yt afore, to show your mastership my mynd, I besech
your mastership to cause him that shall come with these lettres
from my mystres and hir counsellors, to have good chere, [{and
that I trust to deserve,{] and to send to me a bill by the same,
as yt shall please you. Sir, I have sent to you iij yerds of
whit dameske for a cowrenet, as good as I cold bye any, and I
wold have sent much more things, save only my businesse is
great. Also I have payd your fyne in the Excheker, but I take
not out a discharge unto the next terme, because I purpose to
get a grant more. Also I besech your mastership to shew that
sayd messinger, that ye had no word from me this vi weke, and no
man in your place to know from whence this berer come, lest that
ther messinger shold understand of my sending. Please yt your
mastership to give credence unto this berer, and let him departe
or the other man come with the letters; and all such service as
yt pleseth you to comand me, yt shalbe done, with Gods grace,
who evermore preserve you and yours in health and honor. Wrytten
in Furnywalls Inne, the 19 day of March, 1496. I humbly pray
your mastership to cause the messinger to speake with my Lady,
and if hir ladyship wold send by him a token to my master, yt
shall avale hir another of xx tymes the valor. Now, and my good
lady wold of hir great gentlenes and noble mynd send a token, as
is within wrytten, I cold never deserve yt to hir, for yt shold
be to me great honesty, and the greatest that ever I had; for by
your mastership and hir,
<P 128>
I am put to more worship than ever I shold have comyn to. Sir,
as I wrote in, I was purposed to have sent a fellow of myne to
your mastership, but now I send this my wrytting by Preston,
servant with my master Gascoyne. Pleaseth your mastership to
kepe this byll, and whatsoever you doe for me in word, cost, and
wrytting, yt shalbe mine, when we be maryed, to relesse and
unbynd; and so I will. Sir, I besech you, pray my lady to make
the messinger that shall come from my mystres good chere. I know
not as yet what shall come, but as I am infirmed, a gentilman of
Clementts Inne. I besech your mastership, and my good lady both,
to take no displeasure with my simple wrytting this tyme, for my
mynd is set so much otherwyse, that I cannot perfictly do my
duty. Our Lord preserve you.
   Your servant,
   Edw. Plompton.
[\19 March 1496-7.\]

<Q PLU 1497 EPLUMPTON>
<A EDWARD PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 128>
[} [\LETTER XCIX.\] }] 
(^To my singuler good master, Sir Robart Plompton, Kt. deliver
these.^)
   In my right humble wyse I recomend me unto your good
mastership, and to my singuler good lady. Sir, I have bene at
Sacombe, and had theder with me from Ware William Barloe,
<P 129>
goodman of Christofer and William Waman, now for the tyme baly;
and of thos I have bylls, of the which I sent to your master the
copies, of such woods as is sold late. The maner goeth downe and
decayeth, and all the houses about yt; the woods are clene
destroyed and ligly to be in hast. I have given and done, as
fare as I myght, in comandment and charge for further felling,
and carying such as are felled and remane ther. Necessary it
were, me seames, that ye made a bargan with Master Hastyngs, and
it wold be. It is a fayre lordship, and yt were well gidded; it
is ix myle to compasse about. Sir, I have done good ther and
avantaged much wood and tymber, both as well felled as not
felled, and my doings wyll stand. I have put the byers in great
fere. I pray you, master, in all hast possible send to me word
of your mynd in the premysses and all other, and a byll of such
lands as ye are content
<P 130>
to departe with to Kilborne in exchange, and if ye wyll have the
(\surcrortr\) . Our Lord (^Jesu^) preserve you and all yours.
From London, the xvi of February.
   Your humble servant,
   Edward Plompton.
[\16 Feb. 1496-7.\]

<Q PLU 1499 JPULLEIN>
<A JOHN PULLEIN>
<G M>
<P 132>
[} [\LETTER CI.\] }] 
(^To his especyall good master Sir Robart Plompton, knight, at
Idell, in hast.^)
   Sir, please yt your mastership to understand that I sent a
letter to you with Bryan Pullan of Gawkthorp of all the
cyrcumstance of the matter betwene my master and your son and
his wyfe, and William Babthorp; and as that none ther wold be.
But the (\venyre facias\) com in servid. Sir, so yt is now that
suerly they intend to have a (\habeas corpora\) agayn the
Jurrours with a (\nisi prius\) this next assise in Lent, at
Yorke. Therfore, Sir, ye must make speciall frynds to the
Jurrours, that they may be labored specially, to such as ye
trust wylbe made frindly in the cause. Sir, I have letten Mr.
Kyngesmell see the dede of gift of the chaunchry of Elton, and
shewed to him as your mastership presented in after the deith of
the last Incumbent, which presentee was
<P 133>
in by the space of iiii or v dayes at the least, and desired of
hym to have his best counsell. And he answered to me thus; that
(\subpena\) lay not properly in the case: but the best remedy
for your Incumbent was to have assise at the common law, if any
land belonged to the sayd Chaunchre. And if he had no land, then
to have a spoliacion in the spirituall court agaynst the preyst
that now occupyeth, because he is one disturber, or els to suy a
(\quare Impedit\) at the comon law. And so is to take no
(\subpena\) . And for these causes I rest to I know your
pleasure ... wryting. Sir, as for the (\subpena\) agaynst Sir
John Hastyngs, I shall remember it. The accion of wast agaynst
Sir John Hastings goeth forward, as fast as the law wyll serve.
And if ther be any other service to doe, it shalbe done to all
my power, with Gods grace, who be your preservor. From Lyncolns
Inn at London, this tuesday next Candlemas day.
   Your servant and bedman,
   John Pullan.
[\29 Jan. 1498-9.\]

<Q PLU 1499? GPOLE>
<A GERMAYN POLE>
<G M>
<P 138>
[} [\LETTER CVIII.\] }] 
(^To his right worshipfull father, Sir Robart Plompton, kt. be
these delivered in most godly hast.^)
   Right honorable and worshipfull father and mother, in the
most
<P 139>
lowliest wyse that I can, I mekely recomend me unto you,
desiring to here of your welfaire and prosperitie, the which I
pray almyghty (^Jesu^) long to continue to his pleasure, and to
your most joy, and comforth, and harts ease. Also, father, my
brother William hartely and mekely recomendeth him unto you, and
unto my lady my mother, desiring you of your dayly blessing. And
I allso lowly pray you of your dayly blessing, the which is as
glad unto me, as unto any child that you have, for I have no
other father but you, nor no other mother but my lady; for my
speciall trust is in you. Therefore I pray you take me as your
poore son; a beadman for my prayer you shall wyt I life. Sir, if
it pleaseth you to know that a munday my brother was at Thornton
brygge, and I were; all, blessed be almyghty (^Jesu^) , be in
gud health. And my sister Margaret, and my wife, and my sister
Elinor lowly recomend them unto you and unto my lady, praying
you of your daly blessing, the which is better unto them then
any worldly goods. Veryly, Sir, Master Nevell nor Mrs. Nevell,
neither of them was at home; but his brother was at home, and he
made us very great chere as myght be. Also, Sir, I am very sory
that the death seaseth not at Plompton, but I trust to almyghty
(^Jesu^) that his
<P 140>
great mercy and grace [\SOME WORDS ARE HERE OMITTED\] send to my
lady hir joy and comforth, and to all your frinds, as my daly
prayer shalbe therfore. Sir, the cause of my wryting is but to
heare of your gud welfare, the which is to me great joy and
comforth. And, Sir; I lowly pray you and my lady, my mother, to
take this letter in good parte, for it is wrytten hastyly with
my own hand, and without the 'vise of any other body; for I trow
you had rather have it of my owne hand, then of another bodyes.
Also, Sir, John Tynderley recomendeth him unto you and unto my
lady, my mother, gladly willing to heare of your welfare. No
more unto you, good father, nor mother, at this tyme, but pray
the holy Trenytie to have you in his blessed keepinge.
   Your good son and beadchild,
   German Pole.
[\anno circiter 1499.\]

<Q PLU 1499 R3EYRE>
<A ROBERT EYRE III>
<G M>
<P 140>
[} [\LETTER CIX.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull brother, Sir Robart Plompton, kt. this
byll be delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull brother, I recomend me unto you, and to my
lady, and also to my daughter and yours, with all my other yong
cousins, desiring hartely to here of your welfaire and theres
both, which I besech (^Jesu^) preserve unto his pleasure and
your harts comforth, ever thanking you, and my lady both, of the
great worshipe and gud chere, that I and my frinds had at my
last beyng with you. Brother, yt is so that your farward,
Christofer Law, is departed of this word and hath left behind
him a wyfe and vii
<P 141>
smale children, wherfor I hartely pray you to be gud master unto
hir, so that she might have hir farme, and the rather for my
prayer. And if it please you, when your servants come over into
this contry, that they will have my mynd in the letting of the
sayd house; and I trust to take such wayes therin, as shalbe for
your worship and profit both, as (^Jesu^) knoweth, who ever
preserve you. At Padley the tewsday next afore St. Luke day in
hast.
   Your loving brother,
   Robart Eyre.
[\15 Oct. 1499.\]

<Q PLU 1499 JPULLEIN>
<A JOHN PULLEIN>
<G M>
<P 141>
[} [\LETTER CX.\] }] 
(^To his especyall good master Sir Robart Plompton, knight, be
these delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, I recomend me unto your mastership.
Sir, laytly I sent wryting to my father to convey to you, which
I trust be comes to your hands afore this tyme; in which
wrytinge is conteyned how the Justices of the Common Place
awarded a new (\venire facias\) betwyxt my master, your son, and
Wylliam Babthorpp; and also in a lytle byll therin, is contayned
the names of such persones as the sayd Wylliam Babthorpp
entended to have had reconnyd in the first (\venire facias\) . I
wold your mastership made specyall labor to have one indefferent
pannell of the Coroners; they must be labord by sum frynd of
yours. Sir, the proces in thaccion of West goeth forward, as
fast as the law wyll serve. Sir, I receved two letters from you
with xxvi=s= viij=d=, and all such copies, as was conteyned in
your wryting. Sir, so yt was that Parkin Warbek and other iij
were arreyned, on satterday next before the making herof, in the
Whithall at Westmynster for ther offences, afore Sir John Sygly,
knight marshall, and Sir John Trobilfeild; and ther they all
were attended, and judgment given
<P 142>
that they shold be drawn on hirdills from the Tower, throwout
London, to the Tyburne, and ther to be hanged, and cutt down
quicke, and ther bowells to be taken out and burned: ther heads
to be stricke of, and quartered, ther heads and quarters to be
disposed at the Kyngs pleasure. And on munday next after, at the
Gildhalle in London wher the Judges, and many other knyghts,
commysioners to inquer and determayn all offences and
trespasses; and theder from the Tower was brought viij
presoners, which were indited, and parte of theme confessed
themselfe gyltie, and other parte were arreyned: and as yet they
be not juged. I thinke the shall have Judgement this next
fryday. Sir, this present day was new barresses made in
Westmynster hall, and thether was brought Therle of Warwek, and
arrened afore Therle of Oxford, being the Kyngs grace
comyssioner, and afore other Lords, (bycause he is a pere of the
Realme) whos names followeth; the Duke of Bokingham, Therle of
Northumberland, Therle of Kent, Therle of Surrey, Therle of
Essex, the lord Burgenny, lord Ormond,
<P 143>
lord Deyngham, lord Broke, lord of Saynt Johns, lord Latymer,
lord De la Warre, lord Mountioy, lord Daubeney, lord Hastings,
lord Barns, lord Zowch, lord Sentmound, lord Willughby, lord
Grey of Wylton, and lord Dacre. And ther Therle of Warweke
confessed thenditments that were layd to his charge, and like
Judgment was given of him, as is afore rehersed. When thes
persones shalbe put in execution I intend to shew to your
mastership right shortly; and give credence unto this berrer.
From Lyncolns Inne at London, this xxi day of November. By your
servant and bedman,
   John Pullan.
[\21 Nov. 1499.\]

<Q PLU 1500 R3EYRE>
<A ROBERT EYRE III>
<G M>
<P 143>
[} [\LETTER CXI.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull brother, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.
these be delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull Brother, I recomend me unto you, and to my
lady your wyfe, and to my daughter and to yours, with all my
other cousins your childred, desiring to heare of your welfaire
and thers both, which I besech (^Jesu^) preserve unto your most
harts comforth; evermore thanking you and my gud lady, your
wyfe, of the great and worshipful chere I and my kynsmen had
with you. Brother, ye be remembred how the writings of the
covnaunte of marage of my son and your daughter, as it be not
made upp by the 'vise of learned counsell; wherfore, if it
please you to apoynt any day, and please about the beginyng of
Lenten, when that I myght wayt uppon you, I wilbe glad to wayt
upon you, and
<P 144>
a learned man with me: and all such promyse as I have made on my
party shalbe well and trewly performed, with the grace of
(^Jesu^) , for ye shall find me ever one man. Also, brother, I
pray you that ye wold send me by my servant, William Bewott,
this bringer, the payment which I shold have of you att
Candlemas last past, for I have put myselfe unto more charge,
since I was with you, then I had before. For I have maryed
another of my daughters, and I have begon to make a wall about
my parke that I shewed you I was mynded to do, which, I trust,
when ye see it, ye will like it well. Praying you not to fale
herin, as my trust is in you, and to give credence to this
bringer. No more but (^Jesu^) preserve you. Written at Padley on
St. Valentyne day with the hand of your brother,
   Robart Eyr.
[\14 Feb. anno 1499-1500.\]

<Q PLU 1500 GEMERSON>
<A GEORGE EMERSON>
<G M>
<P 145>
[} [\LETTER CXIII.\] }] 
(^To the right wyrshypful Sir Robert Plompton, kt. in hast.^)
   Right wyrshipful Sir, and my special good mastre, after dew
recomendations had, I hartily thank your good mastership that it
wold please you to cause mee to bee praied for. I beseeche
Almighty God that I may live to do you such service therfore, as
may contente your mastership. I received your letter by Mr.
Sygskyke, clerk, and 2 ryals closed therin; and acording to your
commandement I have retained in the Exchequer, by the advice of
Mr. Blakewall, Mr. Denny; in the Chauncry, Porter, and given
unto them ther fees. I have delivered all your letters, and from
Mr. Blakwall, I trust, ye have answer by one of Mr. Gascoygne
servants. And also for all things compresed in your first letter
that I received by John Wadd, as touching any accion to be taken
aganst you, or any (\diem clausit extremum\) for any office to
be founde, I shall doe therin as much as lyeth in my power, that
your mastership may have knowledg therof. If ther be any such
wryt made, yt must be in Porters office, and he hath promysed me
that ther shall none passe, but he shall give me knowledg
therof; and if ther come any (\Inquisicio virtute officii\) , it
must come into the office, wherat Mr. Deene is dayly: wherfore,
I trust to
<P 146>
God that your mastership shall have knowledg, if any such things
fortune. They have made search in the Escheker for the perdon
that was pledet, suppose the title had bene made therin as here
to Sir William, and when they saw that it was by feffment, they
were not well content. The names that are in the byll for to be
schereff; (^Not: and Derb:^) Sir Ralfe Langford, Ormound, and
Such; (^Yorkshire^) , Sir William Bulmer, Sir William Engelby,
and Sir W. Griffith. Sir Humfrey Stanley labors to be Schereffe
in Staffordshire: herof I shall acertan you, as sonne as the
byll cometh from the King. I have receyved from your mastership
xl=s=; at the end of this terme, I shall send you a byll of all
the matters of this terme; and as for the accion which procedeth
against Sir John Hastyngs, I shall contynue yt to the next
terme, by the grace of God, who ever kepe you and yours. From
London, with the hand of your servant, the x day of November.
   Georg Emerson.
   Sir, also yt was shewed unto me by one Master Newdigate, that
thes names for (^Not: and Derb:^) were put in the byll by the
labor of the sayd Master Newdigate, at the request and desire of
Sir William Meryngs heire. And yt please your mastership, me
semes that yt were well done to send unto M=r= Meryng, to know
wheder he wilbe frindly in thes matters or no; and if he may doe
any thing with the above named personnes.
   [\10 Nov. 1500.\]

<Q PLU 1500S? WGASCOIGNE>
<A WILLIAM GASCOIGNE>
<G M>
<P 149>
[} [\LETTER CXVI.\] }] [^TO SIR ROBERT PLUMPTON^]
(^To my Uncle Plompton, be thes delivered.^)
   Uncle Plompton, I comennd me unto you. And where I should
have bene with you to morow at Selbie, in good fayth it is so
that I was yesterday so crased and sicke that I kept my bedd all
day, and this day I am not of power to goe, nor ride as yet. And
also there is with me my uncle Ward, Thomas Lawrance, Ralfe
Nevell, and others; but that notwithstanding, if I had my
health, I should be with you. And if ye cannot conclud tomorrow,
appoynt a new day, and I shalbe glad to be with you with grace
of (^Jesu^) , who ever keepe you. Scribbled at Gaukthorp, this
fryday in hast.
   Your nepho,
   William Gascoygne.

<Q PLU 1500? WGASCOIGNE>
<A WILLIAM GASCOIGNE>
<G M>
<P 149>
[} [\LETTER CXVII.\] }] 
(^To his worshipfull Uncle, Sir Robart Plompton, kt. deliver
these.^)
   Right worshipful Uncle, I comennd me unto you, praying you to
send me all such evidence, as ye have concernyng any lands or
tenements in Tokwith; so that I may have them at Tadcaster this
nyght, for the matter is in communication there: and the sayd
evidence shalbe safly kept for you, as knoweth Almyghtie
<P 150>
(^Jesu^) , who evermore preserve you. Written at Tadcaster this
fryday.
   Your nepho,
   William Gascoygne.

<Q PLU 1500 GEMERSON>
<A GEORGE EMERSON>
<G M>
<P 150>
[} [\LETTER CXVIII.\] }] 
(^To the worshipfull Sir Robart Plompton, kt. deliver these.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, and my especiall good master, after
due recomendations had, I hartyly thanke your mastership for
many great things done for me afore this, beseching Almighty God
that I may doe your mastership some service therfore. I receyved
your letter by George Crose, and as for all your great matters,
as yet nothings sayd; yet yt is shewed me that they purpose
suerly to have an assise this somer. Wherfore I trust your
mastership doth provide for the best remedy, which after my mynd
is to make many frinds and of the best. I send unto your
mastership closed in this box the sawar for the Inditement,
according to your comandement, which is (\retornabile xv
Trinitatis\) . And thus Almyghty (^Jesu^) preserve your
mastership and all yours to his pleasure. From London, the first
day of May, with ond of your servant to his power.
   Georg Emerson.
[\1 May 1500.\]

<Q PLU 1501 JPULLEIN>
<A JOHN PULLEIN>
<G M>
<P 150>
[} [\LETTER CXIX.\] }] 
(^To the right worshipfull and his speciall good master, Sir
Robart Plompton, kt. deliver these.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, I recomend me unto your mastership,
letting you understand that laytly I wrott to you a letter of
your
<P 151>
matters; where was, that the great man E., as far as undoubted
as I can know, intendeth to have assyses agaynst you. Wherfore
tyme is to labor as well the Schereffes, as all your frynds, and
every country where your land lyeth. It is for that the said
great man E. with other of the Kyngs counsell, sitting for
assessyng of fynes for knyghts, ... which may doe hym pleasure,
he is intreated scecretly to owe his good will; ye may have
trial by lyklyhed what ther answere shalbe: thus he under
myneth. But let you for no labour. All such copies of your
matters resteth in my keeping. And this was your lawiers
conclusion; that your mastership should take a sure frynd to se
all your evydence (which I thynke after my mynd must be Mr.
Eleson), to this intent: that your sayd counsell may have all
the estayts made by your graynser and father, as well uppon
marrage lesses, as other wayes, and in lykwyse, how all the sayd
estats come home agayne, wrytten (\verbatim\) in paper: and to
have all your new esvedence by your father to John Norton and
others, and estats made to have to your father for terme of
lyfe: and to send copies of all matters proving matrymony
betwyxt my sayd master your father, and my lady your mother: and
further prove which of the sayd feffees was
<P 152>
present at possession. Loke they be at London the begining of
this next terme, with xl=li= ... Sir Richard and ij men, and the
sayd copies. If Mr. Eleson can find any of your lands talled to
the here male, send copies therof; I thinke none be. And thus
the holy Trenety send good speed to yours. From Lyncolns Inn, at
London, this tuesday in the crose dayes.
   Your servant, John Pullan.
   I find no sure frends in all cause but George Emerson. Yaxley
and Frowick, serieants, and Brook and Edgar are your counselors.
[\18 May 1501.\]

<Q PLU 1501 JPULLEIN>
<A JOHN PULLEIN>
<G M>
<P 153>
[} [\LETTER CXX.\] }] 
(^To the Right worshipfull, and his especiall good master, Sir
Robart Plompton, knight.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, I recomend me unto your mastership,
letting you understand, that latly I sent dyvers letters to you;
thaffect of which letters was, that your adversaries intendeth
suerly to attempt the law against you. Therfore I can wryt no
other thing to your mastership, but oftymes remember my wryting;
it toucheth your worship and wele. Therfore make your frynds to
take your part, as frynds shold doe, as well in Nott. Derb. as
Yorkshire, and God, I trust, shall be steresman in every
ryghtwyse cause. Master Robert Constable, servant, shalbe
Justice of assise in Cornewall, Devonshir, and other west
countryes, with Master Frowike; so that I trust, he shal not be
at this
<P 154>
assise. Such pronunstications as a speciall freind lent to me, I
copied them, as your worship shall see, and receive herewithall
closed. As for all other causes, this bringer can shew to you by
mouth, as larg as I can wryte, as (^Jesu^) knoweth, who preserve
you. From Lyncolns Inne, at London, this Whitsonemunday.
   Your servant and beadman, John Pullan.
[\31 May, 1501.\]

<Q PLU 1501? RTPLUMPTON>
<A ROBENET PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 154>
[} [\LETTER CXXI.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull master and brother, Sir Robart
Plompton, knyght.^)
   After lowly and all due recomendations, I recomend me unto
your good mastership and good brotherhode, praying the same,
that yt will please you to send me by this berer the Martynmese
farme for such lands and tenements as ye have by lease made
betwixt you and me. And, Sir, as I suppose, insomuch as ye
pleased not to content me at the untermost day limytted in the
sayd lease, ye wylbe agreable that I enter to the sayd lands and
tenements; wherfore, so I pray you to send me word in a byll by
this berer, whether ye will that I enter to the same lands and
tenements, or that ye will hold them still, and content
according to the same lease. And, Sir, in so much as this is the
first day of breach of your payments, I wyll nothing attempt
therin, to I have word from you by this bearer, if it may so
please you. And Almyghty (^Jesu^) preserve you in prosperouse
lyffe, long to endure. From Yorke the xii=th= day of January.
   Your servant,
   Robart Plompton, of Yorke.

<Q PLU 1501 RTPLUMPTON>
<A ROBENET PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 155>
[} [\LETTER CXXIII.\] }] 
(^To our right woshipfull master, Sir Robart Plompton, kt. be
this letter delyvered in hast.^)
   After most lowly and all due recomendations, we lowly
recomend us unto your good mastership; certyfying you, that as
fare as we can understand or know, John Rocliffe and John
Sothell
<P 156>
ar come to Kynreston place, and ther purpose to tary and abyde,
to such tyme as they thinke tyme convenient for to enter into
your liflods in this country, and take distor [\distress\] . And
we have bene at dyverse places of your liflods, and finds your
tenants well disposed toward you; and sithen, the most part of
gentlemen in this country, and especyally the Eyres, so that ye
wold come yourselfe and be sene amongst your tenants and frynds,
the which were to them a singler pleasure and comforth, and to
yourselfe a great strength. And to bring with you not over the
number of xx horse at the most, and such as may have your advise
and counsell to take derection, the which may be to the suerty
of your lyflod and tenants. And if ye can gett master Mydleton,
bryng him with you, or Richard Grene, or some other, and come to
Hassop, for we have desevered us, and some departed tham. And
with the grace of (^Jesu^) , and ye come betwixt this and
tuesday, that all things shalbe to your harts comforth in time
to come. But, Sir, they have bene here diverse tymes, doing for
your wele and pleasure, and thinkes ye will, or dar, not put you
in jopartie for your owne; for and ye come, they will put them
in dever to do any thing that may be to the wele of your liflod
and tenants. And, Sir, bryng with you money convenient for your
expenses, for as yet ... here be now [\noe\] rent teyned. Now
[\noe\] over to you at this tyme, who the holy Trenety have you
in his keping. By your servant,
   Robinit Plompton, with other moe.
[\Anno 1501.\]

<Q PLU 1501 R3EYRE>
<A ROBERT EYRE III>
<G M>
<P 158>
[} [\LETTER CXXV.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull brother, Sir Robart Plumpton, kt.
these be delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull brother, I recomend me unto you. Brother, I
have received your letter, be the which I perceived ye be mynded
to be with my lord of Schrewsbury on munday next, be noune of
the day; and that ye wold have me to meet you by the way.
Brother, my lord is at Wynfeld, and my lady both, and I wilbe
glad to wayte upon you at Hegham, a myle from Wynfeld, or els at
Chesterfeld, whether it please you. Brother, I am afrad lese
this labour be vayne, for in certayne I caused all the labour to
be made possible at this tyme, both to my lord and to my lady,
and he wold not be turned; for he myght not, and keepe his truth
and promyse made afore. Notwithstanding, sithe ye be comyng on
your way, I thinke it is well done, ye to speake with my lord
yourselfe, as prevely as ye can; and thus (^Jesu^) kepe you. At
Padley, the sunday next afore the feast of St. John Baptise.
   Your loving brother,
   Robart Eyre, esquire.
[\20 June 1501.\]

<Q PLU 1501 R3EYRE>
<A ROBERT EYRE III>
<G M>
<P 160>
[} [\LETTER CXXVII.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull brother, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.
deliver these.^)
   Right worshipfull brother, I recomend me unto you and to my
<P 161>
lady, your wyfe, and to my daughter Margret. Brother, I spake
with Frowick on Satterday next after St. Bartelmewday, and I
enquired of him whether the assisse held at Nottingham and
Darby, or not; and he answered and sayd, that he cold not tell,
nor man els, unto munday next after, for that day the Kings
grace had comanded all the Judges and Servants to be with him at
Richmond, and whether he wold comand them to kepe your Servants,
or to tary for other besines at that tyme, he west never. Also,
brother, as for your parte of your panell, I am promysed suerly
they will appere, whose names ar closed in a byll; but as to the
attachment of the proces for your sute, is not yet, as fare as I
understand. But I send about it unto the Shereffe as sone as
Hare Harlad com from you, for sume remedy ther, if he myspede. I
have sent you part the names of the enpannell for Suttell and
Rocliffe, which be in the end of the Hye Peyke, of the which
divers have promysed me not to appere, and moe I trust for to
stoppe. Marveling ye sent nobody to Darby for to take you
lodging, for Emson hath taken much lodging for him, as I am
enfirmed. Also I shall wate one you at Nottingham one sunday
<P 162>
next, except ye comand me contrary, praying you to send me
answere shortly.
   Your loving brother, Robart Eyre, esquire.
[\September 1501.\]

<Q PLU 1501 EPOLE>
<A ELIZABETH POLE>
<G F>
<P 162>
[} [\LETTER CXXVIII.\] }] 
(^To the right worshipfull, my full singuler good master, Sir
Robart Plumpton, knight, this letter be delivered in hast.^)
   Right reverent and worshipfull and my singler gud master, in
the most humble and lowly maner that I can, I recomend me unto
you, and unto my gud lady your wyfe, desiryng to have knowledg
of your prosperous helth, worship, and welfayre, which I besech
almyghty Jesus long to contynue to his pleasure, and your most
comforth. Hartely beseching the gud Lord that redemed me and all
mankind upon the holy crosse, that he will of his benigne mercy
vouchsafe to be your helper, and give you power to resist and
withstand the utter and malicious enmity, and false craft of Mr.
Empson, and such others your adversaries; which, as all the
great parte of England knoweth, hath done to you and yours the
most iniury and wrong, that ever was done, or wrought, to any
man of worship in this land of peace. And non more sory
therfore, then I myselfe is. If it were, or myght be in my poore
power to remedy the matter, or any parcell of the matter, in any
maner, condition, or dede, and whereas I may doe no more, my
dayly prayers shalbe, and have bene, ever redy, with the grace
of (^Jesu^) . And wher it is so that I am bounden to pay to your
mastership, or to your assignes, certayne money by yere, to the
sume of x=li=, at ij tymes, for such lands as be assigned in
ioynter to my nephew, Germayne Pole,
<P 163>
and my cousin, his wyfe and your daughter, I have delivered and
payd to his hands for this last past Martynmas rent v=li=,
trustyng that your mastership is contented therwith. What parte,
or how much thereof, my sayd neveu, Germayne, hath sent to your
mastership, I am ignorant, saving that he shewed me that he
sendeth you but x=li= towards the exibicions of my nese, his
wyfe. I required you as my singler trust is in you, to send me
acquitaunce for my discharg, for the payment of this sayd v=li=;
and moreover I besech you to send me word in writting by the
bringer hereof, how I shall pay my rent from hence forward, and
to whom I shall pay it; and as it pleaseth you by yore owne
writting to comand me, I shalbe redy to performe it, by the
grace of (^Jesu^) , who ever preserve your gud mastership.
Wrytten at Rodburne in hast, the morow next after St. Kathren
day.
   Your true and faythfull beadwoman to hir power, Elizabeth de
Pole.
[\26 Nov. 1501.\]

<Q PLU 1502 JPULLEIN>
<A JOHN PULLEIN>
<G M>
<P 165>
[} [\LETTER CXXXI.\] }] 
(^To the right worshipfull Sir Robart Plompton, kt.^)
   Sir, after my duety remembred unto your mastership, please it
you the same to know, that by instant labour I have gott a copie
of the wryt of thassisse and playnt agaynst you, to the intent
therby to have a wryt of error; which wryt, by the advise of
your counsell, which I had togither, is put to making: and for
the expedition therof, it shall want no dyligence, nor calling
uppon. For the costs and expencs about thes busines wilbe great,
therfore I wold ye prepared money to send, uppon all goodly
hast. And your learned counsell thinketh veryly, if the law may
be indefferently hard, that the proceeding in the sayd assies is
error. It is so that master Frowyke is made Cheife Justice of
the Common place, and therfore ye must myse his counsell; and
that I forthinke. Sir, I have delivered your letters, as well to
Mr. Under
<P 166>
tresorer, as to Blackwall; and Mr. Tresorer shewed me aparte how
your wryting was. I desired him, seeing your great troble and
cost, to spare the payment that ye owed him for a season; and
that he sayd he myght not doe in no wyse, because he had
appoynted such summes of money as ye owe him, to pay it to other
persons; and further sayd, that he could not do no other wayes
but attempt the law agaynst you and your suerty, if ye pay not
according to your wrytting. I intreated him as specially as I
could, to spare you for a season, but it wyll not be; therfore
make schift to pay him, or els you and your surty wilbe sued.
Ever after this, as I may have knowledg in all your matters to
your comforth, I shall wryt to your mastership, with the grace
of Almyghty God, who send you and all yours ther healths also.
From Lyncolns Inne, this sunday next after All Saints day. Sir,
for all other matters this berer can shew you at large, for a
proteccion, and what your lerned counsell sayd therin.
   Yor beadman John Pullan.
   Frynds the Bishop of Rochester and Docter Warghhan.
[\6 Nov. 1502.\]

<Q PLU 1502 GPOLE>
<A GERMAYN POLE>
<G M>
<P 166>
[} [\LETTER CXXXII.\] }] 
(^To his right worshipfull father, Sir Robart Plompton, kt.
deliver thes.^)
   Right worshipfull father, in the most humble and lowly wyse
that I can, or may, desiryng to here of your prosperous health,
worship, and welfaire, which I hartely besech Almighty Jesus
encrease and contynew to his pleasure, and your most comforth.
<P 167>
Father, I am very desirous to here from you, and to know how you
do in your matters. I can noe more doe therein, but hartely pray
to God to helpe you in your right, and send you gud speede. And
I pray you let my wyfe have some word from you by this next
carryer, how you doe in your sayd matters; and she and my sister
Ellynor humbly recomend them unto you, and pray you for your
dayly blessing. And both they, and I, pray you that we may be
recommended unto my brother William Plompton and all your
folkes. (And we rehersed them by name.) And thus the holy Ghost
guid you and all the matters that you labor about. Scribbled in
hast the viii day of November. Father, I can not yet tell
whether I come to London my selfe on this side Christenmas or
not; my servant, the bringer hereof, shall shew, as sone as he
hath the certenty, whether I shall come or be at home.
   Your loving sone to his smale poore,
   Germayn Pole.
[\8 Nov. 1502.\]

<Q PLU 1502 APLUMPTON>
<A AGNES PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 167>
[} [\LETTER CXXXIII.\] }] 
(^To the worshipful Sir Robart Plompton, kt. be thes delivered
in hast.^)
   Sir, in my most hartiest wyse I recommennd me unto you,
desiring to heare of your prosperitie and welfaire, and of your
good spede in your matters; certyfiing you that I, and my sone
William, with all your children, are in good health (blessed be
(^Jesu^) ) with all your servants. Sir, ye, and I, and my sone,
was content at your departing, that my sone should take the
farmes at Martingmas of his tenaunts, or els cast them forth and
prayse ther goods; and so my sone hath done with some of them.
And here are the names of them that hath payd me; Robart Wood,
Peter Cott, John Gloster, Robart Taler, William Bentham. Sir, it
ys let us to understand that thers other tenaunts, that are cast
forth,
<P 168>
hath bene at Cothorpe, and made one ragman to compleane on my
sone and you, that ye take ther goods from them. And that is not
soe, for my sone hath sent for the neighbours of Knaresbrough,
and Harrygate, and Spofforth, to set pryse on ther comon and
cattell after ther consience; and my sone hath set to streys
some in ther layes, for ther is some that will not apply to his
mynd. And they purpose to get on discharg for my sone, that they
may be set in agayn, and he not to occupie; therfore I pray you
to take good heed therupon. And they have set there names in the
ragman that hath payd my sone; that they know not of, nor will
not be conselled therto. Also, Sir Richard Goldsbrough hath
taken an ox of William Bentham, that was dryven over the water
with ther cattell of the towne of Plompton that he caused to be
put over, for the sayfgard of ther cattell. And when he came for
his ox, he answered him and sayd; Sir John Roclife had wrytten
for certayne tenaunts to be so taryed by him, and spirred him,
whose tenaunt he was, and he shewed him whos he was. And he will
not let him have them without a replevie, and I trow he will dye
in the fold; for I sent William Skirgell and William Croft, and
they cannot get him without a replevie. And therfore if ye can
find any remedie, I pray you for; and also I pray you to send me
some word, as sone as ye may, of your good speed. No
<P 169>
more at this tyme, but I betake you to the keping of the
Trenetie. From Plompton in hast, the xvi day (\Novembris\) .
   By your wife, Dame
   Agnes Plompton.
[\16 Nov. 1502.\]

<Q PLU 1502 APLUMPTON>
<A AGNES PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 170>
[} [\LETTER CXXXV.\] }] 
(^To the worshipfull Sir Robart Plompton, kt. be thes delivered
in hast.^)
   Right worshipful Sir, in my most harty wise I recommend me
unto you, desiring to witt your prosperytie and wellfayre;
letting you understand that I and all your children is in good
health (blessed be (^Jesu^) ) with all your servants. Lettyng
you to understand that my Lord Archbishop sent one servant of
his unto my son William, chardging him in the Kyngs name to
sette in the tenaunts agayne; and if he wold not, he wold send
to the schereffe, and cause him to poynt them in agayne. And so
I sent one servant to the schereffe, and the schereffe shewed my
servant that my Lord had wrytten unto him for to poynt them on
agayne. But my sone kepes them forth as yet, and therfor I trow
my lord Archbishop will compleane of my son and you; and sath,
that he will indyte them that was at castyng out of tham. And,
Sir, I pray you that you be not myscontent, that I sent not to
you, for indeed I make the labor that is possible for me to
make, and as yet I cannot speed; but as shortly as I can, I
shall spede the matter. No more at this tyme, but the Trenytie
have you in his keeping. Scribled in hast, at Plompton, this
sunday next after St. Kateryne day.
   By your wiffe, dame
   Agnes Plompton.
[\27 Nov. 1502.\]

<Q PLU 1502 APLUMPTON>
<A AGNES PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 171>
[} [\LETTER CXXXVI.\] }]
(^To the worshipfull Robart Plompton, knight, be thes byll
delivered in hast.^)
   Right worshipful Sir, in my most harte wyse I recommend me
unto you, desiring to here of your welfare and good speed in
your matters. I and all your children is in good health (blessed
be (^Jesu^) ). And, Sir, so it is, as God knowes, that I have
mayd as great labor as was possible for me to make, to content
your mynd in all causes; and now I have mayd the usance of
xx=li=, and sent you with Thomas Bekerdike to content where ye
know. And I pray you to send some wrytting to Thomas Meryng for
the repayment of the money and your discharg. Sir, it is so that
my lord Archbishop hath indytt my sone William and xvi of his
servants, on tewsday was a senit. But Anthony Cliforth gave in
the bill of dytement against my sone and his servants, but the
quest would not endyte them. But my lord Archbishop caused them;
or els he bad them tell who wold not, and he should ponishe
them, that all oder should take insample. And I cannot get the
copie of the indytement, for my Lord hath it in his hands. No
more at this tyme. The Lord preserve you. From Plompton in hast,
this St. Thomas day.
   By your wife, dame
   Agnes Plompton.
[\21 Dec. 1502.\]

<Q PLU 1503 RTPLUMPTON>
<A ROBENET PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 172>
[} [\LETTER CXXXVIII.\] }] 
(^To Sir Robart Plompton, knight, being lodged at the Angell
behind St. Clement Kirk, without the Temple barr, at London, be
thes delivered.^)
   After most harty and due recomendations, I recomend me unto
your mastership and brotherhode, and to my lady your wyfe,
beseching Allmyghty God evermore to preserve and prosper you.
Sir, on munday last come a servant of Sir John Roclyfs from Mr.
Emson to Brian Palmes, and caused him forthwith to take his waye
toward London; and as I am enfirmed, the sayd servant shewed
that at the comyng up of Bryan Palmes, thei shold have an end
with you, and if ye had any land, that ye shold be charged with
my brother William and me. Therfore, Sir, if ye and thei drawd
to an end, as I besech allmyghty (^Jesu^) to send you a good end
after your pleasure and mynd, see how ye shall stand charged
anenst us, and whether ye shalbe charged with the one, or with
<P 173>
both. And, Sir, wher ye sent me word by Georg Barbor to search
for the call of the exigent in the castell of Yorke agayn you,
my cousin your son, or any other of your name, or servant; Sir,
on tewsday last was the court in the Castell, and then was ther
none exegent called agaynst you, none of your servants, nor of
your name. But ther are ix playnts by (\Replegiare\) by ix of
your tenaunts against you, my cousin your sonn, Sir Richard
Plompton, and dyverse of your servants. But how many playntts,
and how many defendants, as yet, I can not get any knowledg; for
the Schereffs clarck sayth, his master hath all the records and
notes, and the playntyffs that day was essoined. And thus
almyghty (^Jesu^) , our Lady, Saint Mary Virgin, Mary Magdalene,
with all the Saints in heven, as I shall dayly besech, prosper
and spede you in all your great besines. Scrybled in hast, the
vi=th= day of February.
   Yours at prayer and power,
   Robart Plompton of Yorke.
[\6 Feb. 1502-3.\]

<Q PLU 1503 WGASCOIGNE>
<A WILLIAM GASCOIGNE>
<G M>
<P 175>
[} [\LETTER CXLI.\] }] 
(^To my uncle Sir Robart Plompton, kt. be thes byll delivered in
hast.^)
   Uncle Plompton, I recomannd me unto you as hartely as I can,
shewing you that my lord Archbishop hath sent a letter to my
cousin William your son and a byll closed therin; which byll and
letter I wold ye gave good heed to, and understand whether it be
Kings comandement, or nay. And also John Vavasour of Newton is
departed to mercy of God, sence ye departed from home, and I
have inquered of the age of his son and heire, which shalbe at
full age within a moneth, and then I am in a suerte to have the
release of him. Also there is a maraige moved betwyxt the sone
of Sir John Roklife and Jane Ughtred, syster to Henry Ughtred,
and great labour have they made to my lord of Northumberland for
the same, which I have stoped as yet. And thus the sayd Sir John
Rokclife, Henry Ughtred, and Anthony drawth all one way; and I
understand they will make more labor to my sayd Lord hastely,
for which cause I will goe to Lekinfeld the next weke, where I
shall know further herein of my lords pleasure, which I know is
your especiall good Lord: and as I can know furthere, I shall
send you wrytting shortly. And also, as I understand, your
adversaries will lay a fine against you, which fine is parcell
of William Midleton's evidence, and is the fine of the house in
Plompton that was my uncle Ralfe Gascoygne. I pray you to send
me
<P 176>
some good tydings, as sone as ye can, of your good speed in your
matters, which I besech Gude may be to his pleasure, and your
comforth and myne; and thus our Lord kepe you. At Gaukthorpe in
hast, the second sunday in Lenten.
   Yore nephew,
   William Gascon.
[\19 Mar. 1502-3.\]

<Q PLU 1503 WPLUMPTON>
<A WILLIAM PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 176>
[} [\LETTER CXLII.\] }]
(^To the worshipfull Sir Robart Plompton, knyght, be thes
delivered in hast.^)
   Right worshipfull father and mother, I recomend me unto you,
praying you of your dayly blessing; and all my brethern and
sisters is in good health (blessed be (^Jesu^) ) and prays you
of your dayly blessing, and my lady mother also. Sir, I marvell
greatly that I have no word from you (and my cousin Gascoyne
also) under what condition I shall behave me and my servants.
Sir, it is sayd that Sir John Roclife will ploue, but we are not
certayne; and if that they come, my cousin Gascoyn saith well
therin, for he will se them on that mannor that they will not
like: and bytts me and my servants keep house, and he will send
us x bowes, and us ned. Sir, your frinds trowes ye beleve fayr
words and fayr heightes, and labors not your matters; for they
trow that ys not the Kings mynd, nor knowes not of ther dealing,
that they indyte you, and me, and your servants, as ye may se by
the Judgment herof. Sir, I have sent you ij letters, derected
from my lord Archbishop; the which I have answered him, that I
will keepe the Kings peace. And also I meane sent him word,
whether the tenants should occupy
<P 177>
or no. And it is my cousin Gascoyns mynd, that they shall occupy
for the tyme; and therfor I besech you send me word, how I shold
do in every cause, and my servants also. Sir, your frinds
thinkes that thes indytements ar for you, and it be shewed to
the King or his Counsell. Both my cousin Gascon, and my brother
Elson, as your counsell, gives you so to do. And also I besech
you send me word, as shortly as ye may possibly. No more at this
tyme, but the Trenietie kepe you. From Plompton, on saint
Benedic day.
   By your son,
   William Plompton, Esquier.
[\21 Mar. 1502-3.\]

<Q PLU 1503 GEMERSON>
<A GEORGE EMERSON>
<G M>
<P 177>
[} [\LETTER CXLIII.\] }] 
(^To his right worshipfull Sir Robart Plompton, knyght, this byl
be delivered.^)
   Right worshipful Sir, after due recommendations had ec=ra=, I
understand by my lady that your mastership hath spoken with the
Kyngs grace, wherof I am very glad. Sir, I wold avise your
mastership, that if the King command your mastership to nayme
any of his counsell, which ye wold shold have examination of
your matters, to refare that matter unto his grace, and that
your mastership name none; for if your mastership shold name
any, peradventure the King wold thinke parcialty in them, and
also your frinds shold be knowne. If yt like your mastership, yt
were best for to shew the Kyngs grace that ye wold refuse none
of his counsell, except Mr. Bray, Mr. Mordaunt, and such other
as are
<P 178>
belonging to Mr. Bray. Sir, at the reverence of God, keepe your
frynds secret to your selfe, for fere that ye leese them. I
remit all these matters to your wisdom, and thus I beseech
Almighty (^Jesu^) send your mastership good speed. At London,
with the hand of your servant,
   George Emerson.
[\Anno 1502-3.\]

<Q PLU 1503 GPOLE>
<A GERMAYN POLE>
<G M>
<P 178>
[} [\LETTER CXLIV.\] }] 
(^To his right worshipfull and most especiall gud father in law,
Sir Robart Plompton, kt. be thes delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull and my most especiall gud father in law, in
my most umbele maner I recomend me most hartely unto you, and
unto my lady my mother in law, gladly desiringe to have knowledg
of your prousperyte, wellfayre, and harts ease, the which I
besech almyghty (^Jesu^) long to contynew and increase unto his
pleasure, and unto your most joyfull comforth and gladness. Sir,
if it please you to understand, that since my last coming into
Darbyshire, it was infirmed me, that ther was in Staforthshire a
parcell of land, the which should be ther at Combryge and
Cramarsh, that was not receined the recovery of the size at
Nottingham and Derbye. Wherfore, Sir, I toke upon me in your
name to send unto the tenants for as much rent as thay were
behind, since the last payment that was made unto Sir John or
Preston; and they desired my servants to com agane, as that day
sennyt, and they should either have the rent, or be suffered to
streyne on such guds as they fond on the ground. And so they did
com
<P 179>
againe as they had apoynted them, and in the meane season,
thorow the meanes of one Berdall of Assope, ther had bene iiij
of Suttell and Roclife servants, the which wold have had the
rent; and your tenaunts answered, that they knew not wherfore
that they should pay them, and so they went ther way. Howbeit,
they sayd they wold be ther shortly againe, and for that cause
they wold not pay my servant, as for at that tyme. Howbeit, they
promysed them upon ther fayth that they shall not pay one penny
unto the tyme that they have some word from you.
   Furthermore, Sir, if it please you to understand of the great
unkindnes that my grandam hath showed unto me now latly, as the
bringer herof can more planly shew you by muth, to whom I besech
you to take credence on. For be ye sure, Sir, that I was never
so unkindly delt with; all is because that she well know it that
ye are asunder, therfore she thinketh that she may give and sell
all at her owne playsure. I will besech you for the reverence of
(^Jesu^) to be so gud father unto me and my wyfe as to mayntayne
it that is my ryght, and to se a remedy for it, as my speciall
trust is in you above all other creatures livinge. Furthermore,
I wold desire you that I may have knowledge how that you do in
your matters, for I here tell that you dyd well. That wold be
the most joyfull tydings unto me that ever was, or ever shalbe,
as knoweth the blessed Rode of Rodeborne, who save you in his
blessed keepinge. Amen. I will besech you, Sir, that this simple
letter may recomend me unto my brother William, and my brother
Maliverey, with both my sisters, and my sister Eyre, with all
your houshold.
   By your humble son and beadman,
   G. de la Pole.
[\Anno 1503.\]

<Q PLU 1503? GPOLE>
<A GERMAYN POLE>
<G M>
<P 180>
[} [\LETTER CXLV.\] }] 
(^To his right worshipfull father, Sir Robart Plompton, knyght,
thes letter be delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull and my most singuler good father in law, in
my most humblest maner I recommend me right hartely unto you,
and unto my lady my mother in law, inwardly desiring to have
knowledg of your wellfare and harts ease, the which I besech
almyghty (^Jesu^) of his infinyt mercy and grace shortly to send
you, unto your most joyful comforth, and to the pleasure of your
harte. So it is, Sir, that I understand by the letter that I
received from you, that ye have the Kings protection ryall, the
which is the most joyfullest tydings that ever I hard, since the
tyme that I was borne of my mother. For now, I doubt not but
with dew labor mad unto the Kings grace, and with the gud
counsell of your lovers and frinds, all the vexation and troble
that ye have had now laytly for your matters, by the grace of
the blessed Trenity, shall turne unto your joyfull comforth and
harts ease, considering how falsly, and how unrighteously, the
size is past against you, contrary to the law either of God, or
man. Furthermore, Sir, I have bene at Combrige for your rent at
our tenaunte, William Smith, and I received of him for one
yeares rent xl=s=. the which I send you by the brynger hereof.
Howbeit, I lay at outside ij dayes or I cold have it, he was so
fearfull to pay it because of Sir Robart Shefell and Emson; and
he desireth you to be his gud master and beare him out, that a
be not vexed nor trobled therfore, for be ye sure he is stedfast
unto you. And I wold have had rent in Crakmarsh, but the
tenaunts wold pay me none; and I wold have streaned, but ther
could no man shew me which was
<P 181>
your ground. Wherfore, I supposed that it should have hurt your
matters to have streyned, not knowing your ground from his.
Also, Sir, I desired you in my last letter to be so gud father
unto me, as to com speake with my grandam for diverse matters,
the which longeth unto my profit. Howbeit, I have no gud answere
of you. But now I will desire you, for the reverence of 
(^Jesu^) , to doe for me as I will do for you, if my power were
unto my will, and make it in your way to com speake with hir for
the welfare and profit of your daughter, my wyfe, and me. Many a
gentleman in Darbyshire marvelleth, I being so nere my age, that
ye will not com and speake with hir for my right; and if ye
come, it will save me greatly, more then ye know, in dyvers
matters that I shall shew you of, by the grace of (^Jesu^) , who
have you in his gloryous keeping.
   Your owne son and beadman,
   German de la Pole.
[\Anno 1503.\]

<Q PLU 1503 RTPLUMPTON>
<A ROBENET PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 182>
[} [\LETTER CXLVII.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull master and brother, Sir Robart
Plompton, knyght for the King's body.^)
   After most harty and due recomendations, I recomend me unto
your mastership and brotherhode; and wheras my brother William,
like as I shewed you a byll, hath in his name and myne put
<P 183>
a byll unto the Kings grace agaynst Rocliffe and Suttell, which
hath made answere, as appearethe in the byll I sent you by Ball.
And the Kings counsell comaunded my brother Wylliam to goe and
enter into Ocbroke; and so, in his coming home, he went thether,
and wold have entred, and William Sawcheverell wold not suffer
him. And he shewed the copie of our deed, and he wold not admyt
it; but the tenaunts sayd, if he come againe afor alhallowes,
and bryng the deeds under seale, they shold endever them to pay
us. And I thinke to send Sir Robart North thither with him, in
the weke next afore alhallowmase. Wherfore I pray you that ye
will lett Sir Robart have the ij=d= deed with him in a box,
which is of feoffment, thider, to the intent abousayd; and ye
shall have them delivered againe unto you, or my lady, whether
ye shal please. And if you wyll my brother Wylliam bring them up
to you unto London, I shall bynd me that he shall trewly deliver
you them. And of your gud mynd and pleasure in thes premyses, I
pray you that ye will vochsafe to send me knowledge in wryting.
And, Sir, I understand your adversaries reporteth, your matter
shalbe determyned by the Kyngs Judges and Sergiants, and ther, I
dout me, ye gitt but litle favor. Therfore the sonner ye goe up,
I trust yt be the better for you. And almyghty (^Jesu^) preserve
you, and send you gud speede in all your busines, and that
shalbe my daly prayer, as God knoweth. At York, this Munday.
   Your servant Robart Plompton.
[\Anno 1503.\]

<Q PLU 1504 APLUMPTON>
<A AGNES PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 184>
[} [\LETTER CXLIX.\] }]
(^To the worshipfull Robart Plompton, knight, be this byll
delivered in hast.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, in my most hartie wyse I recomend me
unto you, evermore desiring to here of your prosperytie and
wellfaire, and good sped in your matters, shewyng you that I and
all your children is in good health (blessed be (^Jesu^) ) and
prays you for your blessing. Sir, it is so now that I have made
you thewsans of the money, that ye sent to me for, and I have
sent it you with John Walker at this tyme; the which I shall
shew you how I mayd schift of, at your comminge. And I pray you
that ye be not miscontent that I sent it no sooner, for I have
made the hast that I could that was possible for me to do. And
also, Sir, I will not lett Tho: Croft wife plow nor occupie her
fermeald, but saith she shall not occupy without yer life. And
also I pray you to send me word how you speed in your matters
againe, as soon as ye may; and also to send me word where ye
will your horses to come to you.
<P 185>
No more at this time, but the Trinity keep you. From Plumpton in
hast, the xix=th= day of March.
   By your wife,
   Dame Agnes Plompton.
[\19 March 1503-4.\]

<Q PLU 1504 APLUMPTON>
<A AGNES PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 186>
[} [\LETTER CLI.\] }]
(^To the worshipfull Robart Plompton, knight, be these delivered
in hast.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, in my most hartiest wyse I recomend me
unto you, desiring to here of your prosperytie and welfare, and
good spede in your matters, the which I marvell greatly that I
have no word from you. Sir, I marvell greatly that ye let the
matter rest so long, and labors no better for your selfe, and ye
wold labor it deligently. But it is sayd that ye be lesse
forward, and they underworketh falsly; and it is sene and known
by them, for they thinke to drive it that they may take the
Whitsonday ferme: and so it is sayd all the country about. Sir,
I besech you to remember your great cost and charges, and myne,
and labor the matter that it myght have an end, for they have
taken on (\capias\) and delivered for certayne of your tenants.
And so they have taken Edmund Ward at Knarsbrough and arrest
him; the which is a great nossen in the country, that they shall
get such prosses, and ye dow none to them, but lett them have
there mynd fullfilled in every case. And the other tenaunts
cannot pays ther housses, but they shalbe cagid; and also
willing none of your servants shall not pas the dowers, but they
mon be trobled. And also they have stopped the country, that
ther will no man deale with any of your servants, nether to bye
wod, no nor nothing els. Therfore, I pray you that ye will get
some comandment to the Scherefe that the prosses may be stoped.
Also, Sir, I send you the copy of the letter that came from the
Undersherefe, and the copy of the causes, and the letter that
come from William Elison; the which I had mynd in for loyssing
of Edmund Ward, for I have gotten him forth by the wayes of
William Ellyson. And also, Sir, I am in good health, and all the
children (blessed be (^Jesu^) ), and all your children prayes
you for your daly blessing. And all your servants is in good
health, and prays delygently
<P 187>
for your good speed in your matters. And also it is sayd, that
they have cagments for them that hath bought the wood, that they
dare not deale therwith. For without ye get some comaundement, I
wott not how your house shalbe kept, for I know not wherof to
levy one penyworth. No more at this tyme, but the Trenietie
keepe you. From Plompton in hast, the xii day of Aprill.
   By your wyfe,
   Dame Agnes Plompton.
[\12 April 1504.\]

<Q PLU 1504 APLUMPTON>
<A AGNES PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 187>
[} [\LETTER LETTER CLII.\] }] 
(^To Sir Richard Plompton be thes byl delivered in hast.^)
   Sir Richard Plompton, I recomend me unto you, dessiring and
prayng you that ye will se some remydy for thes prosses, that
they may be stopped; and that ye will goe to my lord Dayrsse,
and make on letter for me in my name, and shew him how they delt
with my housband tenaunts and servants, and ye thinke it be to
dowe. And I pray you that ye will se that nether thes, nor none
other prosses, pas, but be stoppyd, as my speciall trust is in
you. For I have sent up the copy of the (\capias\) , with one
letter from William Elesson and one other from Under Sherife,
that ye may, after the scest of them, labor as ye thinke best by
your mynd. Also, Sir Richard, I pray you to remember my other
[{order{] ; for Thomas Stabill hath taken the west Rod and the
est Rod, and hath mayd the fenses, and so she hath no gresse to
hir cattell; and also they sow hir land, and will not let hir
occupy nothing as yet, and that discomfortheth them much. No
more, but the Trinete kepe you. From Plompton in hast, the xiii
day of Aprill.
   By me Dame Agnes Plompton.
[\13 April 1504.\]

<Q PLU 1504 APLUMPTON>
<A AGNES PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 188>
[} [\LETTER CLIII.\] }]
(^To the worshipfull Robart Plompton, kt. be thes byll delivered
in hast.^)
   Right worshipfull, I in most hartee wyse recomennd me unto
you, desiring to heare of your wellfaire and good speed in your
matters, letting you understand that I am in good helth, with
all your children (blessed be (^Jesu^) ), and pray you of your
daly blessinge; and all your servants is in good health and is
right glad to here of your welfare. Sir, one the eving after the
making of this letter, your servant Edmund Robyson come home,
and so I understond by your letter, that you wold understand if
Sir John Roclife servants have received any ferme in Yorkshire,
but therof I can get no knowledg as yet. But they have sold oke
wood at Nesfeld, and lettes them stand to the tyme of the yere,
one oke that is worth xl=d= for xij=d=; and also they have sold
aches at the same place: and the okes are sold to William
Clapame and Richard Clapame, and the aches to the towards there
about. And also at Idell, they have sold holyn to James Formes
and to Thomas Quentin and William Aches, and herof I can geet no
more certaintie as yet. And also there is no mo of your tenaunts
to get as yet, nor your servants nether, at this tyme; but the
Trenitie have you in his blessed keepinge Scrybbled in hast, the
fryday next after St. Marke day.
   By your wyffe,
   Dame Agnes Plompton.
[\26 April 1504.\]

<Q PLU 1504 EPOLE>
<A ELIZABETH POLE>
<G F>
<P 190>
[} [\LETTER CLV.\] }] 
[\NO ADDRESS.\] [^TO SIR ROBERT PLUMPTON^]
   Right worshipfull and my singuler good master, in the most
humble and lowly maner that I can or may, I humbly recomend me
unto your good mastership, and unto my good lady your wyfe,
desiryng hartely to here of your welfaire, and also of your good
speed in your weighty and great matters, which I have prayed
for, and shall doe dayly. Sir, I receyved a letter from you,
which bare dayt the viii day of June, and in that letter ye
wrote to me, that it was my sone Germyne mynd, and yours, with
other his frynds, that I should occupie still att Rudburne, as I
have done in tymes, as long as we can agre; upon condition that
I wold be as kynd to my sayd son Germyne, as he intendeth to be
to me. I pray Jesus that I may find him kynd to me, for it is my
full entent and purpose to be kynd and lovyng unto him and his,
whersoever I come. But thus the matter is now, that I have taken
another house within the Freres at Derby, which is but of a
smale charge, and ther I entend to dispose myselfe to serve God
dilygently, and kepe a narrow house and but few of meany; for I
have such discomforth of my son Thomas unfortunate matters, that
it is tyme for me to get me into a litle cornner, and so wyll I
doe. I will besech you and him to take no displeasure with me
for my departing, for it wilbe no otherwyse; my hart is so sett.
Moreover, as touching the custodie of all such evidence, as I
have now in my keeping, concernyng thenherytance of my sayd son
Germyne, a gentleman of your acquantance, Mr. Herry Arden, hath
bene in hand with me for them, and I have shewed him,
<P 191>
whensoever and to whom it shalbe thought by you most convenyent
tyme of the delyverance of them, I wylbe redy to delyver them,
for I will be glad to be discharged of them; for I will flitt at
this next Mighelmas, as I am full mynded, or sonner, with Gods
grace. I pray you contynew my gud master, and owe me never the
worse will therfor; for it ryseth on my owne mynd to give over
grett tuggs of husbandry which I had, and take me to lesse
charge. And with Gods grace I shalbe as kynd to him, and to my
daughter, his wyfe, as ever I was in my life, as well from them,
as with them. With the grace of (^Jesu^) , who ever preserve
you. Wrytten at Rodburne in hast, the x=th= day of July.
   By your poore sister and trew beadwoman,
   Elizabeth Pole.
[\10 July 1504.\]

<Q PLU 1504 GPOLE>
<A GERMAYN POLE>
<G M>
<P 191>
[} [\LETTER CLVI.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull father-in-law, Sir Robart Plompton,
kt. be this delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull and my most singuler good father-in-law, in
my best maner I hartely recomend me unto you, right glad to here
of your welfare, the which our Lord contynew long unto his
pleasure and your most comforth. Father, the cause of this my
wryting unto you of myn own hand, is for a matter that no man
knoweth
<P 192>
of but onely my wyfe, and I, and the partyes. Father, this is
the matter; ther is a gentleman, the which had maryed one of my
naunts, whose name is Randolpe Manwring, and he beareth great
love and favor unto my sister Ellynor, and she doth likewise
unto him the same. And the gentleman hath desired me to wryte
unto you, to know if ye can be contented that he have hir in
marage to his wyfe; the which if that ye so be, he wilbe glad to
meat you in any plase, that it please you to apoynt, and to have
a communication in the matter. And I thinke in my mynd that he
wilbe contented to take lesse with hir than any man in Inglond
wold doe, being of his avyowre, because of the great love and
favour that is betwyxt them. And, father, this I will say by myn
uncle Manwryng; his land is a c marke, and also he is as godly
and as wyse a gentleman, as any is within a m. myle, of his hed.
And, Sir, all the whole matter lyeth in you and in noe man els;
but if that she were myne owne borne sister, I had lever that
she had him, knowing him as I doe, than a man of vi tymes his
land. Father, how that ye are disposed in this matter, I besech
you that I may have answere, as shortly as ye can; for my sister
Ellynor putteth herselfe utterly unto that thing, that is your
mynd. And my wyfe and I will doe the same, by the grace of
(^Jesu^) , who send you shortly a good end in your matters.
Amen.
   Your son,
   Germayn Pole.
[\Anno 1504.\]

<Q PLU 1504 GPOLE>
<A GERMAYN POLE>
<G M>
<P 192>
[} [\LETTER CLVII.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull father-in-law, Sir Robart Plompton,
kt. this letter be delivered in hast.^)
   Right worshipfull and my most singuler good father-in-law, in
the best manner that I possibly can I hartely recomend me unto
<P 193>
you with effectuall desire to here of your welfare and gud speed
in your great matters. And likewise, Sir, doth your poore
daughter my wyfe, and my sister Ellynor, desiring to have your
dayly blessing. Father, I have word brought me, by one
Duckmanton of Moginton, from you, that you had a joyfull end in
all your matters, the which were unto me the joyfullest tydings
that cold be thought. Howbeit, Sir, I have had great marvell,
that I have not, since that tyme, hard some word from you.
Father, pleaseth yt you to understand, that I have comuned with
my uncle Maywheryng, according to the effect of your letter; and
veryly, Sir, I can no other wyse perceive by my sayd uncle, but
that he is reasonable in all causes. For first, he wilbe
contented to make hir xx marke joynter; and as for such essew as
God sendeth them, it is noe doubt but he wyll so provyd for
them, that they shall live like gentlemen or gentlewomen,
whichsoever God suffereth. And veryly, father, I am right sure
that my sister Ellynor had rather have hym, you beyng so
content, then a man of far greater lands. And also, father, I
know wher that my sayd uncle myght have great marraiges, both
with great lands, and guds. Wherfore, Sir, yfe yt is your mynd
that the matter goe forward, and the preferment of my syster,
your daughter, in this behalfe, I pray you that I may have
shortly knowledg in writting, what your mind is in this matter,
and what you be worthy to give for his large proffers. And, you
being any thing resanable, I am right sure that ye shall like my
sayd uncle, as well as ever you liked any man, by the grace of
(^Jesu^) , who preserve you. Written at Rodburne in hast upon
Martingmas even.
   By your son-in-law,
   Germayn Pole.
[\10 Nov. 1504.\]

<Q PLU 1506? IPLUMPTON>
<A ISABEL PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 198>
[} [\LETTER CLXII.\] }]
(^To Sir Robart Plompton, kt. be thes letter delivered.^)
   Sir, in the most hartyest wyse that I can, I recomend me unto
you. Sir, I have sent to Wright of Idell for the money that he
promyst you, and he saith he hath it not to len, and makes
choses [\excuses\] and so I can get none nowhere. And as for
wood, ther is none that will bey, for they know ye want money,
and without they myght have it halfe for nought, they will bey
none; for your son, William Plompton, and Thomas Bickerdyke hath
bene every day at wood sence ye went, and they can get no money
for nothing, - for tha will bey none without they have tymmer
tres, and will give nothinge for them: and so shall your wood be
distroyed and get nought for it. Sir, I told you this or ye
went, but ye wold not beleve me. Sir, I have taken of your
tymmer as much as I can get of, or Whitsonday farme forehand;
and that is but litle to do you any good, for ther is but some
that will len so long afor the tyme. And your Lenten stoufe is
to bey, and I wote not what to do, God wote, for I am ever left
of thes fachion. Sir, ther is land in Rybston feild, that
Christofer Chambers wold bey, if ye will sel it; but I am not in
a suerty what he 
<P 199>
will give for it. But if ye will sel it, send word to your son
what ye will doe, for I know nothing els wherwith to help you
with. Sir, for God sake take an end, for we are brought to
begger staffe, for ye have not to defend them withall. Sir, I
send you my mare, and iij=s= iiij=d= by the bearer herof, and I
pray you send me word as sone as ye may. No more at this tyme,
but the Holy Trenyttie send you good speed in all your matters,
and send you sone home. Sir, remember your chillder bookes.
   Be your bedfellow,
   Isabell Plompton.

<Q PLU 1500S? H5PERCY>
<A HENRY PERCY 5TH EARL>
<G M>
<P 201>
[} [\LETTER CLXIV.\] }] 
(^To my right trusty and welbeloved Cousin, Sir Robart Plompton,
knight.^)
   Cosin Sir Robart Plompton, I commennd me unto you, and am
informed that ye pretend a tytle and clame unto a litle land in
Rybstone, the which without tyme of mynde hath belonged unto the
parson of Spofford the tyme being, and hath alwayes bene at his
disposition to now lait that, as I perceive, ye be aboutward
against all right to imbarr and exclud my Chapleyn, now parsonn
ther, and ... my service of the same; wherof I greatly marvill,
considring his predesessors alway hertofore hath quietly and
peasibly had it. And furthermore, well assured I am, Cousen,
that my chaplayn wold not covit to have it, but for the ...
aforsayd, and in the right of his Church; the which, for that I
... patron thereof, I must and will, in that I can, helpe to
defend, as myne owne inheritaince. Wherefore, I desire and pray
you noe further to intromete you with the sayd land and right of
his church, more then ye have in tyme past, in the dayes of
other his predesessours; and in case ye nedely will, wherof I
wold be right sory, know ye veryly ye cannot have my good will
and favour. And that, morover, it shalbe greatly against my
will, that ye or any other shall wrong me in the right of the
same, whill I live. Written in my mannor of Petworth, the last
day of Januarie.
   Your loving Cousin,
   Hen: Northumberland.

<Q PLU 1506? DPLUMPTON>
<A DOROTHY PLUMPTON>
<G F>
<P 202>
[} [\LETTER CLXV.\] }]
(^To the right worshipfull and my most entyerly beloved, good,
kind father, Sir Robart Plompton, knyght, lying at Plompton in
Yorkshire, be thes delivered in hast.^)
   Ryght worshipfull father, in the most humble manner that I
can I recommend me to you, and to my lady my mother, and to all
my brethren and sistren, whom I besech almyghtie God to
mayntayne and preserve in prosperus health and encrese of
worship, entyerly requiering you of your daly blessing; letting
you wyt that I send to you mesuage, be Wryghame of Knarsbrugh,
of my mynd, and how that he should desire you in my name to send
for me to come home to you, and as yet I had no answere agane,
the which desire my lady hath gotten knowledg. Wherfore, she is
to me more better lady then ever she was before, insomuch that
she hath promysed me hir good ladyship as long as ever she shall
lyve; and if she or ye can fynd athing meyter for me in this
parties or any other, she will helpe to promoote me to the
uttermost of her puyssaunce. Wherfore, I humbly besech you to be
so good and kind father unto me as to let me know your pleasure,
how that ye will have me ordred, as shortly as it shall like
you. And wryt to my lady, thanking hir good ladyship of hir so
loving and tender kyndnesse shewed unto me, beseching hir
ladyship of good contynewance therof. And therfore, I besech you
to send a servant of yours to my lady and to me, and shew now by
your fatherly kyndnesse that I am your child; for I have sent
you dyverse messuages and wryttings, and I had never answere
againe. Wherfore, yt is thought in this parties, by those
persones that list better to say ill than good, that ye have
litle favor unto me; the which error ye may now quench, yf yt
will like you to be so good and kynd father unto me. Also I
besech you to send me a fine hatt and some good cloth to make me
some kevercheffes.
<P 203>
And thus I besech (^Jesu^) to have you in his blessed keeping to
his pleasure, and your harts desire and comforth. Wryten at the
Hirste, the xviii day of Maye.
   By your loving daughter,
   Dorythe Plompton.

<Q PLU 1515 GPOLE>
<A GERMAYN POLE>
<G M>
<P 211>
[} [\LETTER CLXXIII.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull father-in-law, Sir Robart Plompton,
kt. be these delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull father, in the most loving maner that I
can, I hartely recomennd me unto you, and to my lady my 
mother-in-law, your wyfe; and likwise my poore wyfe, your
daughter, recomends hir unto you and my sayd lady, and prayeth
you of your daly blessing. And we desire hartely the knowledge
of your prosperous health, worship, and welfare, the which I
besech Almyghty Jesus long to contynue to encrease to his
pleasure, and your comforth. And, father, if you be remembred, I
wrote a letter unto you laytly, and sent it unto you by my
servant; in the which letter I instaunced and desired you to
shew your fatherly kindnes unto my poore wife and me, and to be
so gud father unto us, as to make a sure meane that we myght
peaseably enjoy and occupie the land that I bought of you in
Combryg in Staforthshire, (for I thought, that unles the sayd
land in Combryge were specified in this award, now made betwixt
you and Roclife and the heires of Suttele, or els of a liklyhod
they wold enter upon me and disposses me,) and you send me word,
that you thought they wold not have it, nor medle with it. But
thus it is, that now within this fortnyth ther were servants of
Sir William Parpoints and Sir John Roclifes determined to take
away the goods that they
<P 212>
could find upon the ground; and so had they donne, but that the
tenaunt fortuned to here tell of ther coming, and in all
possible hast came to give me warning. And so, by the helpe of
gud masters and frinds, at the last, by fayre means, with very
great payne, entreated them to spare distreyning, till such tyme
as I had sent unto you to know what remedy you wold provide
herin. Wherfore, at the reverence of God, and for the love that
you owe unto my poore wyfe and me and our children, remember how
we stand unto you, and be so gud and kind father unto us to find
the meane, that we may peasiably occupie that litle land, which
I bought of you and truly payd for; and it shalbe to a discharge
of your conscience and, with Gods grace, comforth in lykewyse,
for it shall ever succeed in your bloud. Father, I besech you
thus to doe, to take the payne upon you to make such labor unto
Sir John Roclife, that he will, at your instauncie and by the
mediacion of such of your frinds as it shall please you to cause
to labor unto him, make a release of that land in Combrig.
Father, if it please you to doe your best herin, I doubt not,
with Gods grace, but you shall well bring this matter to passe,
considring the familiaritie betwixt you and him now, and that is
like to be. Thus doing, you bynd me and all myne ever to do you
that pleasure, that may be in our smale power; and not doyng
thus, all that know you and me myght well speake upon it, that I
should, considryng how I stand unto you, pay such a sume of
money to you, and not to be made sure of my bargen. And beside,
yt wold be to me as great discomforth as lightly cold happen me,
which wold greve much more then the losse of my money, or of my
land. And, as you know right well, I have Slyngsby bonden as
your surty in an obligation of x=li= for the perfirmance of your
bargan, which I have redy in my keping. And the Lord preserve
you. From Redburne in hast, upon Trenetie Munday.
   By your faythfull loving son,
   Germayn Pole.
[\4 June 1515.\]

<Q PLU 1515 GPOLE>
<A GERMAYN POLE>
<G M>
<P 213>
[} [\LETTER CLXXIV.\] }] 
(^To the right worshipfull and singuler gud father, Sir Robart
Plompton, Kt. be these delivered in hast.^)
   Right worshipfull and my full singuler gud father, in the
most humble and lowly maner that I can, I hartely recomend me
unto you, and to my lady your wyfe, and in lykewise doth your
daughter, my poore wyfe, and hartely prayeth you of your dayly
blessing, desiring the knowledg of your prosperous health and
welfaire. Father, so it is that upon a truth, of thursday last,
oon Richard Bardall of Hessope came in the names of Roclife,
Parpoynte, and Counstable to my tennant in Combryg, and also to
Crake[{marsh{] and in ther names commaunded my tennant that he
should from henceforth pay me no rent, but to make his rent redy
for them, shewing eich one of them wold send a servant thither
for the rent betwixt this and Martynmas; and told him playnly
that they must have the sayd land, because it was nether in ther
wryting, nor in yours. Father, you sent me word laytly by my
servant, that you had made it sure to me without any daunger. Yt
pleaseth you to let him se your wrytings, and, as I understond,
both by you and by him, it is nether expressed in the wrytings
that towch them, nor you. Yet, notwithstanding, upon mine
honestie, they make this sturryng therin, and so yt is to
thinke, that if they may find any hole or colur therin, they
will troble with me for the same; and yt were great pytie that I
shold have ony troble for that thing, that I have bought and
truly payd for. Wherfore, at the reverence of God, and for the
love that you owe to me and my wyfe, and our children, to make a
sure way for me now at this terme at London. And I pray you send
me word what tyme you will goe or send to London, and I will
send one of my servants to meet you or your deputie ther. And
<P 214>
at his comming whom, bringing me word that you have made it sure
to me without daunger or jopartie, forthwith you shal have payd
you that, that myne uncle Sir Alban promysed you, and at all
tymes the best that in me may be to you and all yours, duryng my
natural life, by the sufferance of (^Jesu^) , who have you in
his eternall keeping. From Rodburne in hast, the iij day of
October. Father, I besech you at such tyme as recoveres or
assurances shalbe made, that it will please you to let it be
expressed by name, that they may be avoyded or expulsed from
ther clame therin.
   Your loving son,
   Germayn Pole.
[\3 Oct. 1515.\]

<Q PLU 1515? WGASCOIGNE>
<A WILLIAM GASCOIGNE>
<G M>
<P 214>
[} [\LETTER CLXXV.\] }] [^TO SIR ROBERT PLUMPTON^]
(^To my uncle Plumpton this letter be delivered in hast.^)
   Uncle Plompton, I commend me unto you. It is so I am like to
have busines for the lordship of Harwood. The Kinge is my good
and gracias Lord, and hath granted it to me, with all the
revenos and profitts thereof, duryng the nowne age of the heire
of Heire Ridman. And as I am enformed, such folkes as be not my
lovers, wold bysie them in the cause; how be it, they have no
matter of law, nor right therin. Wherfore I desire you, if there
be any cause or matter of danger against me in that behalfe,
that ye will be with me, with such company as you can make, at
such tyme as I send to you; at which your comyng ye shall se a
reasonable
<P 215>
suerty to beare me in the cause. And what ye will doe herin, I
pray you send me word in writting be this bearer. And thus our
Lord keepe you. At Gaukthorpe, the xviii day of December.
   Your nephew,
   William Gascoygne.
[\18 Dec. anno circiter 1515.\]

<Q PLU 1520S WGASCOIGNE>
<A WILLIAM GASCOIGNE>
<G M>
<P 215>
[} [\LETTER CLXXVI.\] }] [^TO SIR ROBERT PLUMPTON^]
(^To my Uncle Plompton be these delivered.^)
   Uncle Plompton, I recomend me unto you, desiring you to call
to your remembrance the byrth of my nephew William Farfax, which
was borne with you at Plompton, and let me have the dayt of his
birth. Also I pray you let me have the dayt of the marraige of
my cosin Hair and your daughter, which ye have in wrytting, as I
am enformed; and ye thus doyng bynds me to doe you as great a
pleasure, which I shalbe glad to doe, with the grace of God, who
preserve you to his pleasure, and thus fare ye well. From
Gawkthrop, the third day of March.
   Your
   William Gascoyne.
[\3 March 15-.\]

<Q PLU 1516 JDODDINGTON>
<A JOHN DODDINGTON>
<G M>
<P 217>
[} [\LETTER CLXXVIII.\] }] [^JOHN DODDINGTON TO ROBERT
PLUMPTON^]
(^To my right worshipfull master Sir Robart Plompton, kt.
deliver thes in hast.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, in my most humble maner that I can, I
recomend me to your good mastership, and also to my good lady;
letting your mastership understand that Nicholas, the messenger,
hath delivered a byll into the Stare Chamber of all the prevey
seles that he delivered in the north country: and as many as
apereth not, the Counsell derecteth proses against them.
Howbeyt, I made aledgment for your mastership, wherwith they are
content, and hath given day All-hallow day. And they lay to your
charge lxxxiij=li=, that your mastership shold be debtable to
the King for the lordship of Plompton, for ij yeres, in King
Herre the VII=th= dayes. This must be answered at the next
terme. And, Sir, ther is a suyt against your mastership in the
Excheker for introshon. And, Sir, as for my yong master, that
hath none end as yet. Sir, the Kings grace and the queens lyeth
at Wodfeld; and yt is sayd of a certayne that ther comes a lyget
from Rome to my lord Cartdenall, and shall bring to my lord
Cardenall the paypis with full authoryty and power of all maner
of things in the Reame of England. No more to your mastership,
but the Holy Ghost have you in his keping. From London in hast,
the xxviii of June.
   By your servant,
   John D.
[\28 June 1516.\]

<Q PLU 1519? WPLUMPTON>
<A WILLIAM PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 220>
[} [\LETTER CLXXX.\] }]
(^To my right worshipfull and my especiall good father Sir
Robart Plompton, kt. be thes delivered.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, after dew recomendations had, I homly
recomend me unto you and to my lady and mother-in-law, beseching
you for your dayly blessing. Sir, I have bene dyverse tymes
before the judges for my matters, but I can have none end
<P 221>
as yet, except my cousin Babthorp myght have all the lands in
Hemyngbrough ... and I to have Waton, Northcayffe, Medelton,
Wystou, and lands in Beverley to the valow of xl=s=, and forest
land in Selby to the valow of xx=s=, and iij=li= land more, or
lx=li= in money; and to give answer the first day of the next
tearme. Wherfore, Sir, I besech you of your best counsell therin
by this bearer. And as for your owne matter before Master Dance,
Olever hath wrytten to you the scertayntie therof; and as for
Mr. Woyd, I had money so much to do as to stope the outlawery
this terme. Wherfore, Sir, I besech you to make some search
therfore, for yt is a great danger, as the world is at this day,
as (^Jesu^) knowes, who preserve you in health. Wrytten at
Sacum, the x day of June. Sir, I besech you give credence to
this bearer.
   By your owne son to his litle power,
   William Plompton.

<Q PLU 1520S? AABBOT>
<A ANN ABBOT>
<G F>
<P 229>
[} [\LETTER VIII.\] }] 
(^To my good Lady, Dame Anne Rokesby, be this delivered.^)
   Maddam, after my most louely I recomend me to your ladyship,
evermore desiring to wit of your good wellfare, which is my
dayly prayer to Jesus to inquete to your harts most comfort.
Maddam, I doe wryte to you praying not your ladyship to be wroth
with my husband for the money that he received of my M=rs= your
daughter, that he send not to you by this bearrer. It was my
consent; for in good faith, madam, in a maner we weare eether to
have lost our farme, for M=r= Trey is so trobled in the law,
that he may not forbeare his rent no whyle. Madam, I bad my
husband take your money, and I said, I trust your Ladyship will
not be discontent for your money for a season; the which shall
be befor Lamas, by the grace of God. For in good fayth, madam,
<P 230>
we must have else sold iij of our key, the which had bene a
great hindrance to us. For in good faith we buy that we spend in
our house, and I am faine to eate browne bread and drink small
alle myselfe, and lives as hardly, as God knowes, and must do
for this yeare. I trust to God it shall be ammended the next
yeare; for, I thank God, we had not a better cropp toward this
good whyle. And God reward your Ladyship; we had lived most
hardly, if that your Ladyship had not bene. And I pray you,
madam, let not my M=rs=. your daughter wit of it, for then she
will never trust my husband, nor me. God reward hir, which I am
much bownd unto. I can doe nothing for your Ladyship and hir,
but for to pray for your prosperete. I pray you, madam, let not
my husband know of this letter, and send me word trewly with
this bearrer in a little bill of your owne hand, ij or iij
words, that he know not of your mind. No more, but Jesus kepe
your Ladyship in good health.
   By your power beadwoman,
   Ann Abott.

<Q PLU 1536? RPLUMPTON>
<A ROBERT PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 231>
[} [\LETTER X.\] }] [^TO ISABEL PLUMPTON^]
(^To his mother at Plompton be this letter delivered.^)
   Right worshipful mother, I humbly recommend mee unto you,
desiring you of your dayly blessing, praing (^Jesu^) long to
continew your helth to his pleasur. Mother, I thanke you for the
..... you send mee, for yf you were not, I were not able to
live; for this same Christmasse hath cost mee as much as you
send mee. Wherfore, I am afraid I shal not have money to serve
mee to Easter. Also I wold desire you to send mee word of the
letter that I wrote to my father and you, for to moove my Lady
Gascoin to write to
<P 232>
my lord, her brother, not to bee only his servant, but of his
houshold and attending unto him; for els he wold do as other
lords do, knowes not half their servants. Wherfor, I desire you
that you wil moove my lady Gascoin to write so to my lord, that
I may bee his houshold servant. Also, mother, I wold desire you
to mark wel my letter, that I sent you by Mr. Oughtred; and here
I send you a godly New Testament by this bearer. And yf the
prologue bee so small that ye cannot wel reade them, ther is my
fathers book, and they are bothe one, and my fathers book hath
the prologue printed in bigger letters. Yf it wil please you to
read the introducement, ye shal see marvelous things hyd in it.
And as for the understanding of it, dout not; for God wil give
knowledge to whom he will give knowledg of the Scriptures, as
soon to a shepperd as to a priest, yf he ask knowledg of God
faithfully. Wherfor, pray to God, and desire Jesus Christ to
pray for you and with you. No more to you at this tyme, but God
fill you 
<P 233>
with al spiritual knowledge, to the glory of God, the helth of
your soule, and the profit of your poor nieghbor. Written at the
Temple, the 12 day of ianuary.
   By your sonn,
   Robert Plompton.
[\Anno circa 1536.\]

<Q PLU 1536? RPLUMPTON>
<A ROBERT PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 233>
[} [\LETTER XI.\] }] [^TO ISABEL PLUMPTON^]
(^To his right worshipful mother bee this delivered with
speed.^)
   Right worshipfull mother, I humbly recomende me unto you,
desiringe Jesus longe to continewe your healthe to the pleasure
of God. Worshipfull mother, I am bounde to write to you, yea and
you were not my mother, because it hathe pleased God of his
inestimable goodnes to sende me some understandinge in the
Scriptures; for everie man or woman that it shall please God to
sende knowledge in the Scriptures is bounde to instructe theire
brethren in the lovinge of the Gospell. Wherefore, it is my
dutie to instructe you, most principalle of all other, which
hathe shewed to me so muche kindenes, besides all motherly
kindenes. Wherefore, I desire you, moste deare mother, that ye
will take heede to the teachinge of the Gospell, for it is the
thinge that all wee muste live by; for Christe lefte it that we
shoulde altogether rule our livinge thereby, or els we cannot be
in favour with God. Wherefore, I woulde desire you for the love
of God, that you woulde reade the Newe Testament, which is the
trewe Gospell of God, spoken by the Holy Ghoste. Wherefore,
doubte not of it, dearly beloved mother in the Lorde, I write
not this to bringe you into anie heresies, but to teache you the
cleare light of Goddes doctrine. Wherefore, I will never write
nothinge to you, nor saye nothinge to you, concerninge the
Scriptures, but will dye in the quarrell. Mother, you have muche
to thanke God that it woulde please him to geve you licence to
live untill this time, for the gospell of Christe was never so
trewly preached as it is nowe.
<P 234>
Wherfore, I praye to God that he will geve you grace to have
knowledge of his Scriptures. Ye shall heare perceive what the
profession of our Baptisme is, which profession we muste have
written in our hartes. Which profession standeth in twoe
thinges; the one is the knowledge of the lawe of God,
understandinge it spiritually as Christe expoundeth it, Math. v.
vi. and vii. chapters; so that the roote and life of all lawes
is this, Love thy Lorde God with all thy harte, all thy soule,
all thy mighte, and all thy power, and thy neighboure as thy
selfe for Christes sake. And love onely is the fullfillinge of
the lawe, as saithe S. Paule, and that whatsoever we doe and not
of that love, that same fullfilleth not the lawe in the sighte
of God. And what the lawe doth meane ye shall finde in the
prologue to the Rom: in my fathers booke, called the Newe
Testament. I write unto you because that I knowe you have a
fervent ... and his lawes
[\REST WANTING.\]

<Q PLU 1539? WPLUMPTON>
<A WILLIAM PLUMPTON>
<G M>
<P 234>
[} [\LETTER XII.\] }]
(^To my welbeloved son Robart Plompton at the Iner Temple in
London be this.^)
   Son Robart Plompton, I hertely recommend me to you, and
sending you and your brother God blesing and mine. The cause of
my writing to you now; that I wold you should helpe this
bearrer, yong Letham, in such buisenes as he hath in the Court
of Augmentation, for certaine power for yong children of one
Berkine, deceased, as conserning one farme hold, late belonging
to the hold of St. Robarts, which you know I did speake to the
Ansurer for the use of the said children, and he permised not to
suit them. That notwithstanding, John Benson would have entred;
<P 235>
and now made many great riots upon the said children, and
therfore he is indited with divers persons with him. And now
forther, he hath brought a preve seale against old Leathom and
yong Leathom, and also the eldest child; and for that divers and
many of ther frinds hath moved me to wryte to you to help them
in the said matter. And if it be that you can make any frinds,
to shew Mr. Chaunceler the planer and through in every thing
(and this bearrer can instruct you), and then, I pray you, do
the best for them. And also I would have you to speak with Mr.
Latham, the goldsmith, Lanlord to Robart Oliver, and shew him
how that he will not make his diches and fences belonging to his
farme, but that my corne and gras is spoyled at Watterton by
that meaner. And if he will not seake remedy therof, let Mr. Fox
enter a action of trespas against the said Robart Oliver for
dispoyling my gras at Watterton to the valew of five mark. And
as far as I fele, Mr. Norton comith not up. I shall make your
rents to be gathered, and send it to you as shortly as I can.
And thus hartely far you well. From Plompton, this 14=th= day of
November.
   By your loving father,
   William Plompton.

<Q PLU 1539 JDODDINGTON>
<A JOHN DODDINGTON>
<G M>
<P 237>
[} [\LETTER XV.\] }] 
(^Too the right worshipfull and his singuler good master, Mr.
William Plompton, esquire, at Plompton Hall, in the countie of
York, give theis.^)
   Right worshipfull, my deuty to you premised, in my most
hartyest maner I recomend me unto you, and likewise to my good
Mistres your wife, trusting in Jesus that you with all your
children be in good health, the continuence wherof I pray Jesus
increase. It may please you to be advertised I have received
your gentle letters, datted at Plompton the ix of January, by
the which you required
<P 238>
me to helpe Tho: Compton, your nephe, to some honiest ocopation
at London, with him to be bownd prentis; which I wad gladly to
the uttermost of my power and the helpe of my frinds have don,
as I am bownd, in case he had come unto me, as he did not. The
bringer of your said letters informed me that your said nephew
was determend to kepe in his ownhe countrie, and not to cum to
London. And where your pleasure in your said letter is, that I
shold give you notise if theare wear any thing in varience
within your maner or lordship of Sacomp, to the intent you might
send your pleasure therin by your baly, at his next coming to
Sacomp. Sir, thear is one thing in varience for title of
copehold land ther, which one Edward Glidall, your late farmer,
hath; which land was somtimes one Flegs, unto the which one
Flege now maketh title and hath don long times past. And abowt
Chrismas last past, the same Flegge delivered a (\supenea\) to
Glidall for the same, as I am informed, but what is don therin I
know not; of this matter, Settill, your servant, can informe you
better then I. Allso, ther is one Slepe dweling abowt St.
Albones, who at your last Court thear maid clame to a percill of
grownd of your said copehold in the tenner of Marston, of the
which the same Marston hath a cope. Soever the le
[\nevertheless\] , said Slepe aledgeth that his brother, of whom
the said Marston bought the same ground, never maid surrender
therof, according to the custome of your maner; albeit, it
apereth plainely in a bill remaining with the said Merston, that
the brother of the said Slepe sold unto Merston all his intreast
in the said coppehold. The same Slepe at your last court
required your baly ther, with the asent of the said Merston, to
make search in your court rowls if any such surrender wer maid,
acording as it is mentioned in the said copie remaining with the
said Marston, [{which cope, as
<P 239>
I remember, was maide in the fowerth or fifth yeare of the reign
of our Soveraigne Lord the king that now is,{] where the said
rowle could not be found; howbeit, theare was all the rowles of
this King reigne but onely that of that yeare. Sir, as me
thinks, your rowls thear be not kept as they ought to be; the
cofer wherin your said court rowles lieth is nought and the lock
therof not worth a pene, and it standeth in the church at
Sacomp, wheare every man may come at his pleasure. Wherfore, in
my simple mind it should be nesary for you to provide sum other
meane for the safe custody of your said rowles. Also, Sir, sith
the time I have bene your farmer ther, I have paid, and must pay
within tow yeares next to come, vi fiftens for the farme of your
maner of Sacomp, the first payment xxiiij=s=, the second xxx=s=
viii=d=, and either of the other fower yeares xxiiij=s=, which
amounteth in the hole vii=li= x=s= viii=d=. I marvill greatly
that your said manor shold be so highley charged, considering
the hole fiftene of your towne of Sacomp is but lix=s=. I could
never se no writing of the sesment therof, but only by the
report maid of your tennants ther by word of mouth. Sir, I
wright this unto you, because in case you have any sertinty
therof in wryting, I might know it. I wold be sory to charge
your said maner with any more then ought of right to be; and yet
I have paid the same, bycause I am loth to stand in contentions
with my neighbors .... the truth therin be known. Further, I
have received the letter sent to you by Sir Philip Butler,
knight, wherin he wrighteth that you have bene insensed against
him by the report of lewd and evill disposed persons; by whome
he meaneth the same, I may not judge: howbeit, I think rather by
me then any other. His sones ar discontented with me, because I
kepe grey hounds and hownds at your said maner, saieng that it
becometh not me to kepe grey hownds and hownds so near theyr
fathers nose, with many other things
<P 240>
which I remite for lake of time. And whear your pleasure is in
your said letter, that I shold shew Mr. Butler that in case he
wold give you such fine for your milne of Sacomp as your baly
did demaund for the same, you wear contented that he shold be
amited tennant therof; Sir, sith the receit of your said letter
I have not spoken with the said Mr. Butler, because I have bene
and yet am at London, as this bearrer can informe you. Albeit,
at this (^Hillarii^) tearme I spoke with one Mr. Hide, who
maried the said Mr. Butlers daughter, and lieth and continueth
within the said Mr. Butlers, and is the greatest doer about him;
to whome I shewed your pleasure therin, requiring him to informe
Mr. Butler therof, and of your said pleasure. Wherupon the said
Mr. Hide said, that you demaunded an unreasonable fine for the
same, and that his father did ofer you double the fine that ever
was paid by any man for the same. And further he said, that in
case ye wold not take such fine, as shold stand with reason and
good conscience, he trusted that my lord Chauncler of England,
upon the matter hard before him, wold ses such fine for the same
as shold stand with right and good consience. And whear, also,
the said Mr. Butler, amongst other things, wryteth in his said
letters that your tennants thear be daly in his danger, and that
he might put them daly to trobles, if he wold; Sir, I trust ye
have no tennant thear, but that is the Kings trewe subiect, and
obedient to Gods law and his graces. And as long as the be so, I
dought not but that we, having so noble and gratious a King as
we have, power men shal live in rest, doing their deuty to his
grace, as they and all other ar most bownd to do. Sir, Mr.
Butler of himself is a good and gentle knight, in case he wear
not otherwise counciled, as knoweth (^Jesu^) , who ever preserve
you and all
<P 241>
yours in good and prosperus health with long continuance of the
same to his pleasure. From London the xxii day of Febuary.
   Your fermar and servant,
   John Dodington.

<Q PLU 1540 JDODDINGTON>
<A JOHN DODDINGTON>
<G M>
<P 241>
[} [\LETTER XVI.\] }] [^JOHN DODDINGTON TO ISABEL PLUMPTON^]
(^To the right worshipfull Mrs. Isbell Plompton, this with
speede.^)
   Right worshipfull and my singler good Mistres, my duty to you
premised, in my most hertyest maner I recomend me unto you.
Pleaseth you to understand I have received your letter; by the
which I understand that your pleasure is, that I shuld lett
Edward Glydal have such parcels of ground of your maner of
Sacomburs, as which he think to be nessary for him, and which
parcils I think be minded to be let. Mistres, as yet I have let
no persill of the same your maner to no person. So ever the les,
I have oferd Glidall, that if I let any persill of the sam, that
he shold have the perfirment therof before any other person, and
as farr as I can prevaile, he hath in mind to have ney percill
of the same land. He hath taken a farme of my Lord of Essex, and
that he intendeth to inhabit and dwell; and his eldest son,
which lately dweld in a coppie hold of his father in Sacomb,
hath taken and dwelleth in a farme of Mr. Holts in Lankeshire
abowt Wouden. And the same copiehold the said Edward Glidall
wold have me to
<P 242>
take of him and put in acount therin my self, and that then I
shold and might tack land of the sam your said maner to the said
coppiehold I shuld think expedient; and I as yet am not minded
to take any copehold. Soevertheles, yf Glidall himselfe or his
son be minded to occopie any of the said land that I shall be
minded to let, he shall hav the preferment therof, and your
comaundment in that behalfe, or in any other thing that in me
lieth, to be observyd and kept to the best of my power by the
same, as Jesus [{knoweth{] , who preserve you in good and
prosprus health with long continuance of the same. In hast from
London the xxii=th= of February.
   Your servant and to comaund,
   John Dodington.

<Q PLU 1540? JDODDINGTON>
<A JOHN DODDINGTON>
<G M>
<P 242>
[} [\LETTER XVII.\] }] 
(^To the right worshipfull and his singuler good Master, Mr.
William Plompton, Esquire, this.^)
   Right worshipfull, in my most hartyest maner I commend me to
you and likewise to my good Mistres your wife, trusting to Jesus
that you and all your children and famila be in good health. And
wheare I perceive by Robart Settell, your servant, that the
perty who oweth the lease you sent unto me to be exemplefied,
thinketh long for the same and suposes the same lease to be
lost; Sir, truth it is, the same lease is and remaineth in the
custody of Mr. Henley of the Court of Augmentation of the King's
Majesties Crown, and is assigned with the hands of Mr. Chauncler
and Counsell of the Court aforsaid, and upon the iiij day of
this present month of June was delivered to Duke, clarke of the
said Councill, to ingross in parchment, and then to be sealed
with the seale of the same Court, which shall be done and
finished within fower or 6 dayes next coming. And shortley also,
I shall send
<P 243>
you the same with a bill of such somes of money, as I have and
shall disburse for the same; so that I trust the said party have
no cause to mistrust the having therof. He may not have that
leases in revertion be sold on Alowed Sent Leasur. And
frindship, as knoweth our Lord God, who ever preserve you.
Scribbled in hast at London the 6=th= day of June.
   Yours to comaund,
   John Dodington.

<Q PLU 1542? JDODDINGTON>
<A JOHN DODDINGTON>
<G M>
<P 243>
[} [\LETTER XVIII.\] }] 
(^To the right worshipfull Mr. William Plompton, esquire.^)
   Right worshipfull Sir, my deuty to you premised, in my
hartyest maner I commend me unto you and to my Mistres your
wife; pleaseth yt you to understand my Master hath wryten his
letter to Mr. Goldsbrough for a do for your mastership in Bilton
park or the park of Heay at your pleasur. I trust it will be
signed, and if it be not, my Master desires your mastership to
send him word therof. The same letter is herin closed; and I
pray your mastership, if ther be any service that I [{may{] doe
your mastership, it will please you to commaund me as your
servant. And thus Almighty God to preserve you. Scribled in
hast, the vii=th= day of October.
   Your servant to comaund,
   John Dodington.

<Q PLU 1543 JDODDINGTON>
<A JOHN DODDINGTON>
<G M>
<P 243>
[} [\LETTER XIX.\] }] 
(^To the right worshipfull William Plompton of Plompton, in the
county of York, Esquire, deliver with sped.^)
   Right worshipfull, in my most hertyest maner I commend me
unto you, and likewise to my good Mistres your wife, and very
glad
<P 244>
wold be to heare of your good health and all your children.
Theas be to certifie you that it hat pleased God Almightie to
take into his mercy the late person of Sacomp, Mr. John Petty.
He departed this transetory life upon Easterday last at vii of
the clock before nowne, whose sowle I pray Jesus perdon; and let
us pray that he that shall succede him, be of no worse sorte
than he hath bene. I and all my neighbors hartyly desire your
mastership, iv also he that shall have the same be minded to be
resident and abid upon the same personage, than that you will
move him that cumes [{for{] Sir Christopher Bird, person, who
honestly did kepe the cure under the forsaid late person, and
the maintenment of God service; and may be his depete, as he was
to the other late person, wherof I and all your other tennants
wold be very glad. Sir, I have sent you the Kings writ of
(\dedimus potestatem\) by Mr. Birnand with a letter, sealed in a
box, which I trust is come to your hands; and what your pleasure
shal be to commaund me in the premises, I pray you let me know,
and I shall be glad to accomplish the same. And I pray you have
me hartyle commended to Mr. Robart Plompton, your son, and to my
Mistres his wife, and to Mr. Dinis, your son, and to Mr.
Birnand. And I pray you informe Mr. Birnand his son is mery and
in good health, thanks be to Jesus, who ever preserve you and
all yours. Scribbled in hast at your maner of Sacomp, the Monday
next after Easter day.
   By your to commaund,
   John Dodington.
[\26 Mar. 1543.\]

<Q PLU 1544? HSAVILL>
<A HENRY SAVILL>
<G M>
<P 246>
[} [\LETTER XXI.\] }] [^TO WILLIAM PLUMPTON^]
(^To my cosen Plompton of Plompton, this deliver with spede.^)
   Cossin Plompton, in as harty manner as I can think I recomend
me to you. First, all your frinds ar in good health heare. I
have bene very sick since ye went, but I am well now, I thank
God. I have vewed Christall; the rent of it, as it is now
letted, x=s= iiij=d= score, xv=li= viii=s=; and Arthington is
above xx=li= at the end of xvi yeares: the will be iij score
pownd above the rent. And the woods, my man sayes, he dar give a
thowsand marke for them, but he thinks without dowt he will make
a thowsand =li=. I have written to my Cossin, Henry Savill of
Lapset, to go thorowgh with my Lord of Canterbury for it.
Acording to the comunication, and ye and my Cossen, John
Gascoyne, shall have a part, if ye will wryte to me that ye will
stike to it; and Robart Savill and Henry Savill of Lapsit will
stand to tow parts. I think the woods will give us our money and
more; and the lease cleare to be gotten, for laying out of the
money till we can make it againe of the woods. I have sent you a
rental of it, what it is, every cloase. I pray you let my
Cossen, John Gascoyne, se this letter and the rentall. Kepe it
secret from all other. I pray God send us merry meting. All
written in my ship, at Timmoth.
   Your asured kinsman,
   Henry Savill.
Cussin Gascoyne, your children ar mery.
[\Anno circa 1543.\]

<Q PLU 1544 HSAVILL>
<A HENRY SAVILL>
<G M>
<P 247>
[} [\LETTER XXII.\] }] [^TO WILLIAM PLUMPTON^]
(^To my Cossin Plompton of Plompton, this be delivered.^)
   Cossen Plompton, I recomend me to you, and as I perceive by
my son Robart servant, ye say ye will come over and hunt with
me; and it please you so to do, ye shal be as hertyly welcome as
any man that cam heare of a good space. Ye shall se your arrow
fly and your grayhound run, and all thos that comes with you,
winter and somer, when it please you to come, as long as I live.
As for the other matter, I pas not a litle of it; I have yet
waide it with my councill; and as ye shall know at our meting,
as I am informed, and as I take it, thear ar many dowts by yt.
When I speak with you, I will hide nothing from you in this then
in no other cause. When ye intend to come, let me know what
time, or els ye may hape neither to have me then nor my son at
home; but my wife ye shal be sur to find, and she will send som
with you that shall let you se both rid and fallow, if ye will
take the paine. I have killed a hind or tow of late, and they ar
very fatt this yeare, both in the woods at Tankersley and in my
gardin at Thornehill. I thinke ye weare never yet in no grownd
of mine, and I never say no man naye. Therfore, the faut is in
you and not in me; ye may amend the faut when it please you. The
cause of my sending of my servant at this time, is this; he
informes me that in your countrie thear is a man that can kill
otters very
<P 248>
well; wherfor, I have sent him to git him to me for a weke. I
asure you, they do me exceding much harme at divers places, and
especiall at Woodkirk and Thornhill, and lyes in small becks. My
folks se them daly, and I can not kill them; my hownds be not
used to them. From Sothill, the 8 of November.
   By your asured kinsman,
   Henry Savill, knt.
   After the making herof, or it was sealed, cam my son home
from London. Of Wedsday came my Lord of Norfock to the Court.
The Spanish Duke is gon; the earle of Hertfort, the Bishop of
Winchester, with the French Imbasodor, is gon to the Emporor;
the Duke of Sufolk with other remaines at Calisse. The Frenchmen
that wear of sea ar gon to Depe haven, and the Inglish men ar of
the sea, but the cold weather will sufer no man long to continue
of the water. As conserning news of Scotland, give credence to
this bearrer. This is my owne hand.
[\8 Nov. 1544.\]

<Q PLU 1544 HSAVILL>
<A HENRY SAVILL>
<G M>
<P 248>
[} [\LETTER XXIII.\] }] 
(^To my right worshipfull Coussin, Mr. William Plompton of
Plompton, esquire, this deliver.^)
   Cossin Plompton, I hartely recommend me unto you, thanking
you for all your goodnes at all times. I have received your
letter by Roger Brindell, and wheare that ye wryte thear is no
dowghts
<P 249>
if the matter had come to comunication; ye ar the man that I
trust, and by you I wold have bene ordered: and if ye had so
thought, I wold have confeined myselfe to you. But I perceive
the parte is not minded to commone with him; his wife thinks him
to light. And I think, consider his qualeties, his living, his
posabilete, and confer al together, I think, as good chepe as
this I shall git a living for him, both as good and as fare. And
I am sur ther haith bene comredis won with other far wars then
he, excep one faute. And as for that, ther is and haith bene
many good men with that faut; it is the thing that he cannot
amend. It lets him not to eat, drink, slepe; he can live as well
of it I have given him, as though it had desendit to him. And if
his brother dy without isew, in all by gift he shall have v
hundreth mark land, (and if he wear but inhiretable by the law,
he shold be heir to him, but for defaut of heireship, I thinke
he will not change his estate in this case;) and for defaute of
heires of my body lawfuly begotten, he shall inhirit all that I
have. But in the meane onely, his fault so shall not hirt him in
no profets. Let this matter pas; I hertyle thank you, as much as
if it had come to pase. He is much bownd to you, and, if ever he
be able, to do you pleasure. I trust ye shull se him git a
living, ere the yeare is past. At York, if ye will come and kill
a hind, ye shall be hertyly welcom. Wryten at Sothill, the
xxviii of November. Anno 1544, 36 H. 8.
   Your asured frind, Henry Savill, knt.
[\28 Nov. 1544.\]

<Q PLU 1545 HSAVILL>
<A HENRY SAVILL>
<G M>
<P 250>
[} [\LETTER XXIV.\] }] 
(^To his right worshipful Coussin, William Plompton, esquire,
this deliver.^)
   Cossin Plompton, after my hartie recommendations; your
servant sheweth me ye were and have bene very sick, wherof I am
very sory. And if your sicknes continue, wheare the commaundment
comes forth, send forth your servants and tennants, and send
forth your excuse to my Lord Lieutennant, with a letter of the
trough of your sicknes, and of the time of the continuance
therof; and being advertised of the truth, he will excep of your
lawfull and reasonable excuse. And thus hertely far you well.
From York, the xxviij of May, Anno 1545, 37 H. 8.
   Your asurred kinsman,
   Henry Savill.
[\27 May 1545.\]

<Q PLU 1546 HSAVILL>
<A HENRY SAVILL>
<G M>
<P 250>
[} [\LETTER XXV.\] }] [^TO WILLIAM PLUMPTON^]
(^To my Cossin Plompton this be delivered.^)
   Cossin Plompton, I hartely recommend me unto you. The cause
of my wryting to you is, for that Roger Ramy said to me, he
thought ye would aboute Low sonday be at Thornhill. Ye shall
come to a old howse cleane downe, and as yet litle amended; but
ye shall be very welcome, as I can think. I wold be sory that ye
shoold take paine, and I not at home when ye come. Tomorrow
begging thursday, I must of force ride to Tankerslay, viij miles
hence, and mete my Lord of Shrewsburry, who will be thear
tomorrow by ij of the clock, and se a showt at a stage, as my
keper hath sent me wourd. And of monday, tewsday, and wedsday,
theare is apoynted a great number of gentlemen to mette at cocxs
at Sheifeild, whear I intend, God willing, to be, and every
night will ly at Tankerxlay; soe it will be friday or I come to
<P 251>
Thornhill, which is the xviij (xiiij) of May. Wherfore, I desire
you either put of your comming to that day, or take so much
paine to come the viij myles to Tankerxlay, whear I have no
lodging, but you shall have the best bed the keper haith; and ye
shall se a polard or tow, both rid and falow, and se all our
good coxs fight, if it plese you, and se the maner of our
cocking. Ther will be Lanckeshire of one parte, and Derbeshire
of another parte, and Hallomshire of the third parte. I perceive
your cocking varieth from ours, for ye lay but the battell; and
if our battell be but x=li= to v=li=, thear wilbe x=li= to one
laye, or the battell be ended. And whensoever ye come, I require
you take time to hunt with me for one weke; bring bowes and gray
hounds, and at the time of the year, hownds. A polard is swet
now, and I love it best now at this season; and by Whytsonday
this year I shall have fatt bucks. And or any red deare be fatt,
it will be July, as far as my experience serves. Com when ye
will, and such as I have, ye shall se; and bring good stufe, for
I warne you they ar wild about Tankerxlay and ill to cach: and
if all fale, I have that ar tame enough. I make all these brages
to cause you to com, for I never yet did se you in thease parts;
and ye shall come no time wrong, fence-time then other. I have
tame plenty lyeth out; I can make you game at rid and falow, and
stir no rascall. I besich Jesus send us mery meting. Thus
hertyly far ye well. This Wendsday at Thornhill, the v=th= of
May, Anno 1546: 38 H. 8.
   Your asured frind
   Henry Savill, kn=t=.
[\5 May 1546.\]

<Q PLU 1548 WWOODRUFFE>
<A WILLIAM WOODRUFFE>
<G M>
<P 253>
[} [\LETTER XXVIII.\] }] [^TO ISABEL PLUMPTON^]
(^To the right worshipfull Mrs. Plompton, at Plompton Hall.^)
   With most harty commendations in Christ Jesus, good Mrs.
Plompton, this is to advertis you of the dispatch of such
matters as you did commit unto me at my last being with you,
wheare that I have traveled as I might of, partly by the ade and
help of Mr. Bill, your very frind I think, who hath him most
hartily recommended both to you and Mr. Dynes, and hath sent
your lozengs for a token. You shall allso receive with this
bearrer a letter to Mr. Haymond, feodarry, for your lease,
procurred by Mr. Bill, who shewed me that your charges in the
Cheker is dispacht, and your Cussin Girlington hath brought your
acquitance. And order is taken for you at the Court of the
Wards, and all is well stayd, but yet not paid. Your request was
moved to Sir Arthur Darcy first, who taketh the matter frindly,
as ye shall know. The other gentleman was then by chaunc from
the Court, which was the cause of the first talke with Sir
Arthur. But in such wise as we may, and shall with honesty take
the way which shal be thought the best to you and your frinds.
Because you may se
<P 254>
the effect of my Lord Treasurrers letter for your lease, I have
sent it to you patent and open; and that knowing the effect
therof, then you may send it to the feodary yourselfe, which
were good that you did with spede convenient. Thus I comit you
to the permishion, to him that canne, to will justice, who all
your lawful dedes of honesty desires no dought, who I pray long
to preserve in health. From my lodge at Howell, this Palme
Sunday.
   Yours to my litle power
   William Wodrif.
   The cause that I came not now to you is a broken shin, which
hath much vexed me.
[\25 Mar. 1548.\]

<Q PLU 1549? WWOODRUFFE>
<A WILLIAM WOODRUFFE>
<G M>
<P 254>
[} [\LETTER XXIX.\] }] [^TO ISABEL PLUMPTON^]
(^To the right worshipfull Mrs. Plomton at Plompton hall,
widow.^)
   Right worshipfull Mistres, in my harty wise I commend me to
you, with thanks given to you for all your gentlenes; certyfying
you that as yet my wife hath not laid her belly, but remaineth
at her wits end. And sinc my being with you I have not had iij
dayes of health; I thank God albeit. I am better now, which
aple, that
<P 255>
I was thinking, by God's helpe, to se you after the holadayes.
In the mean time I have sent this knowen bearrer to you for to
se you, because I am not all well, praying you to advertis me of
your health and wellfare, which I will be glad to hear of, as I
wold be any frind I have, as God knoweth, who have you in his
keping, and so fare ye well. From Howell grang, this Palme
sunday.
   Yours to my litle power withowt gile,
   William Wodrif.
I am sory of the hevines of the death of Mr. Dinis wife.
[\Anno 1549-50.\]



<B RERUM>

[^RERUM BRITANNICARUM MEDII AEVI SCRIPTORES. OR CHRONICLES AND
MEMORIALS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND DURING THE MIDDLE AGES.
LETTERS AND PAPERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE REIGNS OF RICHARD III. &
HENRY VII. VOL. I-II. ED. BY GAIRDNER, JAMES. LONDON: LONGMAN,
GREEN, LONGMAN, AND ROBERTS. 1861, 1863.^]

<Q RER 1483 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,53>
[} [\XVII. RICHARD III. TO JAMES III.\] }]
[\A.D. 1483. 16 Sept.\]
By the King of England.
   Right high and mighti prince, right trusty and welbeloved
cousin, we commaunde us unto you. And where as by your lettres
brought unto us by your pursevaunt Dyngvale, as amongst other
largely shewed that for occasion in tyme past thenterupcion,
breche, and disturbaunce of peas betwixt both realmes, hath
growen thrugh the meanes of evyll disposed persones contrarie to
your mynde and entencioun, and that ye remayne in good purpoos
to thobservaunce of love, peas, and concorde of the same
royalmes to be had, and for that entent have sent, at this tyme,
unto us your said pursuyvant to understande our goode mynde in
that behalve, meovyng us for that cause that certaine your
legates mought come unto us enstructed with your mynde in that
partie; cousyn, we acertaine you our mynde and disposicion is
and ever shalbe confirmable to the will and pleasur of God our
aller Creatour in all resounable and convenient peax, without
fenyng, that shuld be desired of us by any nacion. And if that
your desire and pleasure be to sende hider suche personnages to
treate for thaccomplisshing therof, we, havyng knowlage fro you
of their names, shall yeve unto theim oure sure saufconduyt for
ane resonable nombre and season. And God kepe you, right high
and mighti prince, our right trusty and welbeloved cousyn. Yeven
the xvj=th= day of September.
   To, &c., the King of Scottes.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,61>
[} [\XXII. RICHARD III. TO JAMES III.\] }]
[\A.D. 1484. 7 Aug.\]
   Right high and mighty prince, right trusty and welbeloved
cousin, we commaunde us unto you in the moost herty wise. And
where it hath pleased your cousinage to addresse unto us nowe of
late your honorable lettres by our trusty servant and squier
Edward Gower, signifiing by the same howe that upon the
retornyng of your trusty and welbeloved cousin and counsaillor
Robert lord Lile from us into your royaume agayne, and by his
relacion and others ye have ben advertised of our mynde as
touching the good of peas and abstinence of werre betwene bothe
royaumes. Whereunto we shewed us wele applied and inclyned in
suche manere as we largely commoned with the same lord Lile and
yave in charge to our said servant topen unto your said
highnesse or to suche lordes of your counsaille as it wold
please you to depute and assigne to here the same. And that
thereupon your said cousinage likewise inclyned, and according
to our pleasire hathe lymited and ordeigned certaine grete
lordes and othre of your counsaille with ful powair and
commission to comme into our towne of Notingham the vij day of
Septembre next to comme, to advyse, common, and conclude upon
treux and abstynence
<P I,62>
of werre to be observed and kept betwix your lieges and oures;
and also upon love and frendship aliaunces and mariages to be
had in your blode and oures, like as in your said lettres it is
conteigned more at large. Right highe and mighty prince, righte
trusty and welbeloved cousin, we late your cousinage wite that
this your loving and toward disposicion is to us right agreable,
trusting that by the mean of this your ambassade instructed in
al the forsaid maters as plenerly as the caas shal require, and
to doo therein as largely in al pointes as ye were present in
propre persone, according to that that is expressed in your said
lettres, suche good weyes shalbe taken betwix bothe royaumes
whereby effusion of Christen blood may be eschewed, love and
tendrenesse growe daily and encreace, aswele betwix you and us
as the inhabitauntes of bothe royaumes, whiche we take God in
witnesse we as hertly have entended with good condicions, and
soo shal hereafter, as any prince lyving cann or may. And to
thentent no thing faille necessary or behoveful to the spedy
execucion of the premisses, nor of your partie ne of oures, we
have passed our lettres patentes of saufconduyt undre our gret
seale for the sure commyng, abiding, and retornyng of your said
ambassade, and the same lettres sent by this berer according to
your desire and pleasure. Right high and mighty prince, right
trusty and welbeloved cosyn, the blessed Trinite have you in his
keping. Yeven undre our signet at our palois of Westminster, the
vijth day of August.
   Ricardus Rex.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,73>
[^TO THE EARL OF DESMOND^]
[\A.D. 1484. September.\]
To therl of Desmond.
   Right trusty and right welbiloved cousin, we grete you
hertily wele. Lating you wite that nat oonly the zelous desir
and herty affeccion that ye bere unto us according to the duetie
of your ligeance, rapported on your behalve by the reverend
fader in God, our ful trusti counseillor the bisshop of
Enachden, bringer of these, bot also the reteignyng in our mynde
of the manifold benivolent services and kindenesse by our cousin
your fader in sundrie wise to the famous prince of noble memorie
our fader, whom God rest, in 
<P I,74>
seasons of great necessite, and after that to our brother, late
king, doon and shewed, causen us to have and accepte you into
our singler favor and grace. And forasmoch as it hathe pleased
God to sende now the rule of this your reame, to have you the
more tenderly recommended in the same as our said counseillor
hath more plainly to shewe unto you aswele therin as our entent
and pleasure for to have you to use the manere of our English
habite and clothing; for the which cause we sende you by hym a
coller of gold of our liveree and divise with othre apparaill
for your persoune of Thenglish fassion, which we wol ye shal
receyve of hym in our name as we have advised; trusting that at
somme convenient season herafter we shal have you to comme over
unto us hider, and bee more expert, both in the maner and
condicions of us and othre honorable and goodly behavynges of
our subgettes here, as by instruccions we have informed hym
therin more at large. And as touching your demeanyng in mariage,
that for special causes greatly resteth in our mynde and
pleasure, we have in likewise shewed unto hym the same by our
said instruccions, to whom in declaring therof, and of everi
othre thing concernyng the premisses, we desire you to yeve unto
hym ful feith and credence, and with al effect applie and
endevoir you to thexecucion and performyng of the same, as our
great trust is in you. Yeven, &c. the xxix. day of Septembre.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,74>
[^TO GERALD FITZGERALD^]
[\A.D. 1484. September.\]
To Therle of Kildare.
   Right trusti, &c. Certifieng you that as touching the
lieutenantship of our land of Irland, we have ordeigned and
appointed our entierly biloved nepveu Therl of Lincolne to that
office; and have advised and willed him that ye shalbe his
deputie in the same, wherunto he is agreable, as your servant
besides this 
<P I,75>
can accertaigne you more at large; in the which we pray you to
doo and continue as ye have doon for the good and wele of our
said land. And over this where as we sende at this tyme unto
thoes parties the reverend fader in God our ful trusti
counseillor the bisshop of Enachden, bringer of these, for
certain materes greatly concernyng our pleasure, which by our
commandement he hath to shewe unto you, we desire you therin to
yeve unto hym ful feith and credence, and with al diligence to
the performyng of the same, what great pleasure in soo doing ye
shal ministre unto us oure said counsaillor shal in like wise on
our behalve enforme you. Yeven, &c. the xxij. day of Septembre.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,75>
[^TO THE LORD BARRY OF MUNSTER^]
To the Lord Barrey of Monyster.
   Right trusti, &c. And where as we bee informed by the
reverend fader in God, our ful trusti counseillor the bisshop of
Enachden, how that in dayes heretofore in parte aswele thorough
your awne negligence for lak of due sute and labor, as
otherwise, ye have ben injured and wronged of certain lyvelode
and landes, that ye clayme of enheritaunce, lieing in Wales; we
assure you that if ye by your self, or any other persone for
you, shalle lust to make diligence for your recovere therof,
after the processe and due ordure of our lawes we shalle shew
you therin any thing that may apperteyne, asferforth as your
said right, and our lawes shalle require in any wise. And over
that for the true hert and feith that by our said counsellor we
understande ye bere unto us according to the dutie of your
liegeaunce be unto you and alle your kynnesmen verray good and
graciouse soverayn lord in any other cause or mater, as we have
commaunded him to shewe unto you in our behalve; to whome herin
ye wille geve playne credence, as our trust is in you. Yoven,
&c. the xx=ti= day of Septembre.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,76>
[\A.D. 1484. September.\]
To John Power and Piers Power, and aither of them.
   Righte trusty and welbeloved we grete you wele. Latting you
wite that we have understande by the credable reaporte of
reverende fadre in God the bisshop of Enachden of youre fast and
good demeanyng, and specially in repressing and subduyng of our
ennemyes in thoose parties, according to the duetie of your
liegeaunce. For the which and your perfite contynuaunce in the
same we shalbe verrey good and graciouse soverayn lord unto you
and alle your kynnesmen. Desiring you both and aither of you to
see that ye and they deale of oon accorde and unite, advoiding
alle variaunces and stryves amonges you, as ye and they desire
to please us. And our said counsellor hath in our name to shew
unto you more at large concernyng the same, to whome therin ye
will geve pleyne credence, as our trust is in you. Yeven, &c.
the xxij=ti= day of Septembre.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,76>
[^UNKNOWN RECIPIENT^]
[\A.D. 1484. September.\]
To &c.
   Right trusty and welbeloved, we grete you wele. And have
understanden to oure fulle good pleasur by the reaport of the
reverende fader in God, oure fulle trusty counsellor, the
bisshop of Enachden, this berer, that ye be descended of the
auncien blood and lynage of our auncestres of Wolster, and also
the good feithfulle hert and obeissaunce that ye bere unto us
according to the duetie of your liegeaunce. Reteynyng also in
mynde the noble service that ye and your kynnesmen in dayes past
have doon unto the famouse prince of noble memorie, our fader
(whom Jesu rest), and other our progenitors. For the which we
can you specialle thankes, desiring you in our herty wise
fermely to contynue the same towardes us, and that
<P I,77>
ye of that blood amongest you applie and dispose you to be of
oon demeanyng and unite for the wele of your self and of the
contre there, exhorting other lordes and gentilles, as ferforth
as ye may to doo the same, as our trust is in you. Latting you
wite that we more at large have enstructed our said counsellor
with our ferther mynde and pleasur in our name to shew unto you;
wherein ye will geve unto him plaine credence, and in alle wise
conforme you to thutter accomplisshing therof. For the whiche
soo doyng we assure you to bee good and graciouse soverayn lord
unto you and alle your kynnesmen in any your causes herafter.
Yoven under our signet at Westminster, the xxj. day of
Septembre.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,77>
To Sir Alexander Plunkett.
   Trusty and welbeloved we grete you wele. And late you wite we
have understande by the credable reaport of the reverend, &c.,
the bisshop of Enachden of your fast and good demeanyng, and
specially in repressing and subduyng of our ennemyes in those
parties, according to the duetie of your liegeaunce, for the
whiche and your perfite contynuaunce in the same we shalbe
verray good and graciouse soverayn lord unto you and alle your
kynnesmen, as our said counsellor hath in our name to shewe unto
you more at large concernyng the same; to whome therin ye will
geve pleyne credence, as our trust is in you. Yoven, &c., the
xx=ti= day of September.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,78>
[^TO THE LORD BARRY OF MUNSTER^]
[\A.D. 1484. September.\]
To the Lord Barry et Monystre.
   Right trusty and welbeloved, we grete you wele, Latting you
wite we be enformed by the reverende fader, &c., the bisshop of
Enachden, that ye be enhabited in thextreme parties upon our
ennemyes of the wilde Iresshe, and according to your liegeaunce
daily kepe werre with them in the defense of your self and other
our subgiettes there to your gret troubles, hurtes and charges.
For the which we can you gret thankes, desiring you so perfilty
to contynue, whiche we shalle not unremembre, but for the same
be unto you and alle your kynnesmen good and graciouse soverayn
lord in alle your causes herafter, as our said counsellor hath
by our commaundement to shew unto you more at large; to whome
therin ye will geve fulle feith and credence. Yoven, &c., the
xxij day of September.

<Q RER 1484 RICHARD3>
<A RICHARD III>
<G M>
<P I,87>
[} [\XXIX.\] }] [^TO THE DEAN AND CHAPTER OF SALISBURY^]
[\A.D. 1484. 8 Dec.\]
Ricardus Rex.
   By the king.
   Trusty and welbeloved, we grete you wele. And forasmoche as
by calling from this uncertaine and transitory lif of your late
bisshop, ye stande destitute and desolate of a pastoralle hede
and spirituelle governor; for the whiche, by auctoritie of oure
licence royal, ye must hastely procede to theliting of a newe
pastor and bisshop: We, havyng tendre regarde aswele unto the
laudable merites, highe vertues, and profounde
<P I,88>
cunnyng, that the righte reverend fader in God, our righte
trusty and righte welbeloved counsaillor, the bisshop of St.
David, is notarily knowen to be of, as unto othre his notable
desertes, contynued trouthe, and feithful services to us in
sundry wises doon to our singler pleasire, desire and hertly
pray you that in your said eleccion ye wol have him to the said
preemynence and pastoralle dignitie before alle othre especially
recommended and preferred. Wherein we doubte not ye shal not
oonly provyde righte sadly for the wele of the said cure, and
for the honnor of our cathedralle churche there to the pleasire
of God, but also cause us to departe with you the more largely
the favor of our good grace in suche thinges as may be for the
universal wele of you and of our said churche in tyme to come.
Yeven undre our signet at oure palois of Westminster the viijth
day of Decembre.
To our trusty and welbeloved the dean and chapitre of oure
cathedral churche of Sarum.

<Q RER 1491 HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P I,98>
[} [\IV. HENRY VII. TO THE BISHOP OF DURHAM.\] }] [^TO JOHN
SHERWOOD^]
[\A.D. 1491. 5 Feb.\]
By the King.
H. R.
   Right reverend fader in God, right trusty and right
welbeloved, we grete you wel. And have seyn youre writing of the
date of the xxvj. day of January, wherby and other wayes we
understande wel that Sir
<P I,99>
Robert Chambrelayne and diverse personnes with hym in company be
taken at Hertilpole, within the precinct of the fraunchise of
Saint Cuthebert belonging to you and to youre chirche of
Duresme. Wherin ye beseche us humbly that we wol not doo breke,
nor interupte the said franchises. We late you wite that for
thonnor of God and of that glorioux Confessor Saint Cuthebert,
we be and shalbe as good and favorable souverain lord unto you
and to thoes franchises and libertees as any oure noble
progenitors hathe been in tyme passed, and shal moche rather
assist and defende theym then in any wise suffre theym to be
interupted or defeicted. Desiring and hertily praying you that
oure trusty and welbeloved servaunt Sir Edward Pykering, knight
for oure body, may bring the said Sir Robert and thoes other
oure rebelles and traitours to our presence. And if youre
shirief of the bisshopriche have the conveyance according to
your said fraunchise, both of our said servant and of our
rebelles and traitors asfer as the bondes streicheth of youre
said libertiees, for the better saufgard of the same, we shalbe
therwith content and plaised. And astouching the goodes taken
with our said rebelles, we be content also ye have theym, if
that your said fraunchises so require: how be it the lord
Clifford maketh clayme unto theym by raison of certain his
libertees that he pretendeth to have in the lordship of Hert and
Hertilpole forsaid. And inasmoche as for divers grete
considerations it behoveth us to understande what writinges and
othre goodes our said rebelles had with theym, we eftsonnes
praye you that by billes endented betwene you and your officers
on the oon part and our said knight on the other, we may be
certefyed purticulierly and by parcelles of all [{su{]che
writinges and goodes as shalbe founde in their caskettes, males,
tronkkes, or in othre their cariages. Assuring you that our
mynde ys not therby nor othrewise to breke or interupt your said
fraunchises, but rathre 
<P I,100>
to [\LOST BY THE MUTILATION OF THE MS.\] and defende theym as
above. Yeven under our signet at our paloys of Westminster, the
v=th= day of Februarij.
[\ADDRESSED:\] To the Right Reverend Fa[{der in God, our{] right
welbeloved the bi[{shop of Duresme{] .

<Q RER 1505 EDDELAPOLE>
<A EDMUND DE LA POLE>
<G M>
<P I,253>
[} [\XXX. EDMUND DE LA POLE TO THOMAS KILLINGWORTH.\] }]
[\A.D. 1505.\]
   Tomas Kellengwort, I prae yov goe yn to Breuryrissceles to
the king, and speke yov with my lord Wele, and with ys broder,
and recomand me to them, de serreng them to be my govd frendes
as my spesale treust ys yn them. And that yt veld ples them to
remenber me to the K. And that yt vold ples the K. that ys gras
vold be so god lord to me that I met be hovt of thest manse
hand, for as I her that ale the land saeys planle he vele nat
com to the K. And ef yt be so the K. mae se a lekleode wedder
the dewke vele com at hem or nat; stresting my lord my cosons,
bovthe my lord Vele and my lord Fennes ys broder the vele have
me yn rembererans, as the bovt promes me. I ame her by the
kinges comand ment, and ys as glad to do the K. pleser and
sarves as onne mane. And sae thest vordes them "Ef I vare yn the
fardes yend of the vord, I veld be at ys comand ment to
fovelfele ys plessor and comand ment as hone sarvant of ys ys
hovs." Marke vele thest and do yt vesle, and planle, with govd
and lovle as yov kane.
   Also go to yenker Flovrens, and sae I recommand me to hem;
and sae to hem that I send yov spesale to hem for my heelepe be
chescheng hem to speke to the K. for me, as ys vrytvn be fore;
bovt yov mae nat let my lord Vele chake that yov come 
<P I,254>
to yenker Flovrens, for hon of them lovef nat a nodder. Yov mae
sae I ame her, and that the dewke of Gelder send me no vord vat
I sale do, nor heelpes me nat with notheng, as Petter sale chove
yov, bovt vane yov com therechove the Baster ale your masches
and fale nat the of.
   Vat letters vat that the Baster sent you to Anssterdane vryt
me yt yn Ingles.
   Also I prae the Baster to send the menes I mae have som
remede to have mone, for ther vele none of my frendes vele
heelpe me with a pene, as yov ma chowe hem as yov have haneser
fro Pole welyes I be her with the dewke of Gelder. Also, ef yov
se the K. of the Romes mak me recommand dase anurs to hem, and
as yov yov cheke hove the mater stovd be teven the K. of Romes
and me, chev yt. And sae "the favt vas nat yn my lord, for my
lord provfferd ef yovr gras veld en terten my lord for to monnet
with xij hores, my lord vas vel contend to beed yovr plsser, and
vane my lord vas gone I bod be hend xx days to cheke your
plesser," with ferder as yov thenk best.
   Edmund Suffolk.

<Q RER 1505? EDDELAPOLE>
<A EDMUND DE LA POLE>
<G M>
<P I,256>
[} [\XXXII. EDMUND DE LA POLE TO THOMAS KILLINGWORTH.\] }]
[\A.D. 1505?\]
   Tomas Kelengvort, I have reseved yovr letter, and also my
schertes, and to cheerges, and a bonete, I thanke Clakes Bakker.
I marvele yov sond me nat my naggeletes, and my haste and bedes.
I toked yov mone for yt, and thenke yov met vele send me that
that I thake yov mone for; bovt I se vele ef I thake yov no mone
yov vold make bovt letaile cheeufe for me. Ther restes in yovr
handes more thane xij. geldranes of the mone that Petter thoke
yov to be my ger, and also the mone vas as gevd mone as coode
be. Yov have done viesle to send Parrelebene to my cousene
Nevele to povt me to more coostes. Yt vas nat my commandment
that yov chovld do so. Me thenke yov do nat viesle nor
honestele. I have notheng bovt bovt yov have yt, and yov povt me
to ale the coste, nat so meches as gakee [\?\] bovt I vas fane
to geevf heme mone for ys retrovre, and yeet yov send nat me my
ger, that I thoke yov mone to be yt. And ale that I marvele nat
so mes as of yov, and of John Grevfovn, that yov send nat me
vord with yn viij daes. A vas yovr a pontement with me. I vas yn
that kas that I vest nat vat vas best to do; for I had vent yov
and John boovt had been trovbovld; and ef yt had ben so,
parraventer
<P I,257>
I vold a found some remedie for my cheelvf, bovt be yovr bout
folles ther met a theng a happenid veches ve ale met a repentte.
Loke vat dae yov a pont me to have vord frome yov. Fale nat the
dae. Ve sal her the K. ys nove cerstond[\...\] Also the capetene
has vord that the K. of Romes has send for me my naggetels iiij.
pore, a nodder rede bonet. Thest ys to lettele a gret dele, my
beddes my chekves for ale thest yov have mone, for the reng I
her no vord of yov.
   Let me have vord for yov with ale hast, as yov have vord form
the marchand, and also as yov her vord of the K. Cheis vele with
the herres for mone for me as veille as yov kane; yov mae sae I
ame vele, and ef I hade mone. Ef you se the Bastard Oskereke,
sae I vort to you that I marled I hard no vord of hem. He chekes
bettst hove I stand her; and ef he be the mane I thenke he be,
me thenke he met best speke that I met have some honestle en
tertanement with mone. And tele hem, thove he has for me, I have
nat fore geet hem. And I strest hones for ale thest to make heme
govd cher with govd maner, and pavt hem to the speches for yt;
bovt be yov nat bee vane he spekes. Also chove hem of my xx
geldrens for the months of xx stevers for the geldrens, and yet
I most bed tele the monthe be hovt or I kane have my gret and
honorerabovle entertanement.
   Yov hade x geldrens for my chertes, and the cherggs veches I
hade, and a geldrans for my caskeet; ver be comes ale the todder
mone? Provf vele for my reng.
   Edmund Suffolk.

<Q RER 1500 HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P II,86>
[} [\XVI. HENRY VII. TO SIR GILBERT TALBOT AND THOMAS CRESSET.\]
}]
[\A.D. 1500. 6 May.\]
By the King.
H. R.
   Trusty and welbeloved, we grete you wele. And late you wit
that oure welbeloved servant Richard Bulkeley yeoman of oure
Crowne hath shewed unto us how that in cessing of the
benyvolence unto us graunted tawardes oure charges in oure last
voiage and jorney into Fraunce, he was appoincted and cessed
either to contente unto us x. poundes, or elles to goo and geve
attendance upon us in the same voiage at his propre costes and
charges. And albee it that the said Richard went and served us
in his personne, yet as he denyeth it not, he receyved oure
wages unto the tyme of our arryvalle from thens into this oure
reame; for the whiche cause the said x. li. is nowe by you
demanded of him according to the said cessing. Wherfor we,
considring that as wele by grete rage of fyre as other
infortunat chaunces he hath susteigned, as he sayeth, right
grete losses, desire and pray you to enquere whether he bee
hable to pay the said money, of fallen in suche povertie as is
above surmysed. And if the same surmyse bee trewe that then ye
certifie us therof; and in the mean tyme see that he bee not
distressed or troubled for the noon payement of the said x. li.
And these oure lettres shalbe your discharge in that behalf.
Yeven undre oure signet at our castell of Dover the vj=th= day
of May.
<P II,87>
   [\ADDRESSED:\] To our trusty and welbeloved counsaillor and
knight for our body, Sir Gilbert Talbot, and Thomas Cresset,
squier. 

<Q RER 1500S? HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P II,179>
[} [\XXXIII. HENRY VII. TO SIR GILBERT TALBOT.\] }]
By the King.
H. R.
   Trusty and right welbiloved, we grete you wele. And for
thinformacion in writing subscribed by you and our servant
Thomas Decon, touching Richard Knight, whiche ye have caused to
bee notified and declared unto us, we geve you our especial
thankes, ascertaignyng you that we have upon knowlege of the
said enformacion, caused the said Richard Knight to bee comitted
to warde w[{ithin{] our Towre of London. Wherfor we, considering
that he had the keping of our towre of [{Ri{]sebanke, wol and
commaund you that fur[{th{]w[{ith{] upon the sight herof ye do
committe unto the said Thomas Decon the custodye of our said
towre, and put hym into the same with noo gretter nombre of
personnes than shal conveniently serve for the suer keping
therof to our
<P II,180>
moost proffit and avauntage, unto the tyme we shal have provided
at convenient leysir a sufficient personne to have the charge
and custodye of the said towre, and also til ye shal have from
us by writing otherwise in commaundement. And that ye faille nat
herof, as we trust you. Yeven under our signet at our manor of
Grenewiche, the xvij=th= day of May.
   [\ADDRESSED:\] To our trusty and right welbiloved counsaillor
and knight for our body, Sir Gilbert Talbot, our deputie of oure
towne and marches of Calays.

<Q RER 1500S? HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P II,180>
[} [\XXXIV. HENRY VII. TO SIR GILBERT TALBOT.\] }]
By the King.
H. R.
   Trusty and right welbiloved, we grete you well. And have
receyved your lettres wherby we conceyve suche newes as our
servant William Woodhouse lately being at the towne of Amyas
hath shewed unto you; whiche newes we have also herd by the
reapport of our pursevant Calays. Thanking you for your diligent
certificat in that behalve. And as like newes shal fortune to
comme unto your knowleage herafter, soo we praye you to certifie
us from tyme to tyme; wherby ye shall ministre unto us right
singlier pleasure. Yeven under our signet at our manor of
Richemount, [{the{] iiij=th= day of July.
   [\ADDRESSED:\] To our trusty and right welbiloved counsaillor
and knight for our body, Sir Gilbert Talbot, our deputie of our
towne and marches of Calays.

<Q RER 1500S? HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P II,181>
[} [\XXXV. HENRY VII. TO SIR GILBERT TALBOT.\] }]
By the King.
H. R.
   Trusty and right welbiloved, we grete you wele. And where as
we understand that a frere Observant called frere Robert
Steward, being a Scottishman, entendith to come out of the
parties of Fraunce into this our reame, [{We for{] certain
causes and consideracions us moving wol and commaunde you that
in ca[{se{] the said frere Robert happen at any season to comme
unto that our towne of Calays, ye in no maner wise suffre hym to
take any passage there, but that ye cause hym furthwith to
retorne again unto his brethern and convent. And that ye faille
not thus to doo as ye tendre our pleasure. Yeven under our
signet at our manor of Grenewiche, the xv. day of Aprill.
   [\ADDRESSED:\] To oure trusty and right welbiloved
counsaillor and knight for our body, Sir Gilbert Talbot, our
deputie of our town and marches of Calays.

<Q RER 1500S? HENRY7>
<A HENRY VII>
<G M>
<P II,181>
[} [\XXXVI. HENRY VII. TO SIR GILBERT TALBOT.\] }]
By the King.
H. R.
   Trusty and welbiloved, we grete you wele. And where as we
lately by our othre lettres commaunded you to suffre and lette
passe a certain curror whiche
<P II,182>
cam from the corte of Rome to Laurence Bonvice, whom ye stopped,
supposing that he had been the same personne that we certified
you of by our former lettres, whiche shuld bringe down proces
for the alom lately brought in our ship the Souverain. Soo it is
that we have receyved from you certain writinges, sealed with
our seale, whiche the said curror brought according to our
commaundement in our former lettres. How bee it, as we
understand, ye detaigne stil the said curror with his writinges.
Wherupon our mynde and pleasure is that ye permitte and suffre
the said curror incontinently to bee at his libertie, so that he
may comme into this oure reame with his said writinges, your
said restraint notwithstanding. Forseeng alwayes that in caas
any suche personne shal happen to comme to that oure town, out
of the parties of Flaundres, with suche proces as aforsaid, that
than ye use and demean you in that behalf according to our
former lettres without any failling, as our special trust is in
you. Yeven undre our signet at our manor of Grenewiche, the
xvii. daye of August.
   [\ADDRESSED:\] To oure trusty and welbiloved counsaillor and
knight for our body, Sir Gilbert Talbot, our deputie of our
towne and marches of Calays.

<Q RER 1505 TKILLINGWORTH>
<A THOMAS KILLINGWORTH>
<G M>
<P II,381>
[} [\KILLINGWORTH TO EDMUND DE LA POLE.\] }]
[\A.D. 1505. 20 Dec.\]
   Sir, I humbly beseche your Grace not to bee myscontented that
it is soo long or I have sent Sir Walter unto you, for it was on
Thursday last passed or I could have any answer. 
   Sir, I have delivered your lettres to my Lord Vylle in this
towne thissame day xiiij. daies passed and shewed my credence;
and by his wordes it appereth he is not contented that ye ar
thus dealte with alle; and fromhens he made me goo bifor to
Myddelburgh, to abyde there the kinges commyng and his also,
whiche was vij. dayes after or the king and he camme thyder.
   At Myddelburgh also I delivered your lettres to my Lord
Feynes and suche lettres as camme from my Lord Richard by your
commaund; wheruponn my Lord Vyle and my Lord Fynes spake with
the king, and they ij. have written theruponn to you a lettre,
which I sende unto your Grace by this berer, to the whiche
lettre my lord Shevers is also prevy. 
   Sir, I knowe wel this lettre is of noo effect ner answer to
the weighte of your ease ner helpe, ner of my Lord your broders.
For my Lord Fynes shewed me thise wordes amonges other, that he
is your servaunt to doo for you what he cann, but ye must suffre
pacience tylle the season shal comme; and he wold not that many
wordes shuld bee spoken by your servauntes, for the over many
wordes of the Bastart have doon noo good; and for any helpe for
my Lord your broder there was noon but pacience also; and asfor
K. H. traffykkes they knewe theym wele ynough and better than ye
did. And howe
<P II,382>
the king is your good lord, and alle thinges shalbe openned and
shewed to you by my Lord Shyvers at his commyng, which shalbe, I
thinke, after the Kinges departing, whiche shalbe God knoweth
when. Somm saye he goeth, somm saye naye; but my Lord Fynes
saied to me he was sure ye wold sende me again or the Kinges
going. And if ye sende me to the court, Sir, if it please you,
this is best: cause a lettre of credence to bee made there in
Frenche, or a lettre of your mynd to bee made to my Lord Shyvers
aswele as to the other two, and fele asmuche of his mynd as ye
cann. And asfor the mann with the clobbed fote, he was not in
the courte. He is at Brugges, where I thinke the king is nowe.
Don John axked me howe ye did.
   Sir, for clothes and alle necessaries for your body, my Lord
Fynes shewed me that the king hath commanded my lord Schyvers to
provide theym for you; and also for money for you, my Lord
Schyvers also shal delivere you from tyme to tyme; to whom ye
maye sende from tyme to tyme as it shal please you. And also my
Lord Schyvers hath saied to my Lord Feynes, that he hath sent to
you alle redy both money and clothes, and ye shal have more
money shortely. And my Lord your broder hath noo maner aunswer
by John Coke but alle is referred to your lettre.
   Somm menn saye here that thambassadors ar on thissyde commen,
but surely I here it not: aggreed it is sayed they bee of
suretie, and writing therupon commen hider xiiij. dayes past.
Rennyng noyse also that mariage shalbe bytwix K. H. and my Lady
of Savoye; and that also that a comynycacion there is for
aggrement to bee made bytwix you and K. H.; and if it were soo,
I thinke ye shuld bee prevy to hyt. Toysonn is here commen and
retorneth not, wheder the ambassadors be commen or not.
   Sir, the Bastart have I handelled as ye have commanded me,
and he is verrey sory of your caas, and taketh on hym great
defaulte; but asfor his trowthe ye knowe hit: and I shewed hym
as ye wrote to me, but he besecheth you to have writing of your
own hand touching your plaisir, what ye wol he shal doo. And
muche he hath mervailled that ye sent not to hym neyther William
ner Hans; and the Bastart told me hym sylf that he knewe wel his
wordes did him noo good. 
<P II,383>
   And asfor the hors, William hath hym, and he was not sold.
Bankes and Thomas had their money after, as your Grace
appointed; and William also money of me to disloge his hors, and
they yode toguyder to Arneham. And Yonker Florens recommandeth
hym unto you as your servaunt if it laye in hym to doo you any
service. And he hath sent a lettre to my lord the Bastart of
Burgoyne for to have iiij. of your servauntes into wages; which
lettre I have sent to Bottesford by Mr. Paules. I mette hym in
Berges to thentent Bottesford maye goo with alle to Arneham; and
Mr. Pawles wol take Bottesford ij. guld. Brab. in his purs. And
Edward is wol amended, and goeth up and down in his chamber;
withoute faulte, Mr. Paules telleth me, his legge shalbe hole
made. Hans Nagell and Claus Baker recommande theym humbly unto
you. Jesus preserve you. Written at Andewarpen, the xx. day of
December.
   Your humble servaunt,
   Thomas Kyllyngworth.
   Hans Nagell openned your mynd, as ye knowe, by Gilken, to my
Lordes of Ville and Fynes. He wold goo with alle feyne, by him
sylf or by other; he named Alexander the goldsmyth to me.
   On Wennysday last was, the king made knightes of the Toyson
at Myddelburgh x. or xij., amonges whiche were my Lord Nassou,
Don John Emanuel, Monsieur de Emery, Yonker Florens and Monsieur
de la Layn, etc.; but my Lord of Gheldres wold not comme yn to
receve it.
   And I mighte comme where thambassador with the clobbed fote
is, I wold thinke to knowe somwhat of hym. And Hans Nagell told
me that a servaunt of the Kinges told hym that herde the said
ambassador saye but late, that your pais shuld bee made. Sir, my
newes ar but smalle. Yf ye have any, I beseche you to comforte
me; ye shal perceive many thinges by the maner of menn there;
and that it maye please you that I maye knowe your mynd by this
bringer.



<B ORIGINA2>

[^ORIGINAL LETTERS, ILLUSTRATIVE OF ENGLISH HISTORY; INCLUDING
NUMEROUS ROYAL LETTERS: FROM AUTOGRAPHS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM,
AND ONE OR TWO OTHER COLLECTIONS. VOL II. 2ND EDITION. ED. BY
ELLIS, HENRY. LONDON: HARDING, TRIPHOOK, AND LEPARD. 1825.^]

<Q OR2 1520S TWOLSEY>
<A THOMAS WOLSEY>
<G M>
<P 1>
[} [\LETTER CII. CARDINAL WOLSEY TO THOMAS CROMWELL.\] }]
   Myn owne enterly belouyd Cromwell, I beseche yow, as ye loue
me and wyl euyr do any thyng for me, repare
<P 2>
hyther thys day as sone as the Parlement ys brokyn vp, leyng
aparte all thyngs for that tyme; for I wold nut onely commynycat
thyngs vnto yow wherin for my comfort and relief I wold haue
your good, sad, dyscret aduyse and counsell, but also opon the
same commytt sertyng thyngs requyryng expedicion to yow, on my
behalf to be solycytyd: this, I pray yow therfor, to hast your
commyng hyther assafore, with owt omyttyng so to do as ye tendyr
my socor, reliff, and comfort, and quyetnes of mynde. And thus
fare ye wel: from Asher, in hast, thys Satyrday, in the mornyng,
with the rude hande and sorowfull hert of your assuryd louer
   T. Car=lis= Ebor.
   I haue also serteyn thyngs consernyng yowr sylf wych I am
suere ye wolbe glad to here and knowe: fayle not therfor to be
here thys nygth, ye may retorne early in the mornyng ageyn yf
nede shul so requyre. (\Et iterum vale.\)
   M. Agusteyn shewyd me how ye had wryttyn onto me a Lettre
wherin ye shuld adu'tyse me of the commyng hyther of the Duke of
Norfolke: I assure yow ther cam to my hands no suche Lettre.

<Q OR2 1520S? TWOLSEY>
<A THOMAS WOLSEY>
<G M>
<P 3>
[} [\LETTER CIII. CARDINAL WOLSEY TO DR. STEPHEN GARDENER.\] }]
<P 5>
   My owne goode Mastyr Secretary, aftyr my moste herty
recommendacions, with lycke thanks for your goodness towards me,
thes shalbe to advirtyse yow that I have beyn informyd by my
trusty frende Thomas Crowmuell that ye have sygnyfied unto hym
to my synguler consolacions howe that the Kyngs Hyghnes, mouyd
with pity and compassyon, and of his excellent goodnes and
cheryti consyderyng the lamentable condicion and stat that I
stand yn, hath wyllyd yow with other lords and mastyrs of hys
honorable Cownsell to intende to the perfygttyng and absolvyng,
without further tract or delay, of myn end and appoyntment, and
that my pardon shulde be made in the most ample forme that my
cownsell cowde devyse; for thys the Kyngs moste gracyous
remembraunce, procedyng of hymsylf, I accompte my sylf not onely
moste bowndyn to serve and pray for the preservation of hys
moste Royal Majeste, but also thancke God that ye have occasyon
govyn unto you to be a sollycyter and setter forth of such
thyngs as do and shall conserve my said ende, in the makyng and
compownyng whereof myn assuryd trust ys that ye wele shewe the
love and affeccion wych ye have and bere towards me your old
lover and frende. So declaryng your sylf therin that the world
may perceive that by your good meanys the Kyng ys the better
goode Lorde unto me; and that, nowe, newly in maner commyng to
the world, ther may be such respect
<P 6>
had to my poore degre, olde age, and longe contynuyd servys, as
shal be to the Kyngs hygh honor and your gret prayse and laude,
wych undowttydly shal folowe yf ye extende yowr benyvolence
towards me and mine, perceiving that by your wysdom and
dexteryte I shalbe releuyd and in this my calamyte holpyn. At
the reverens therfor of God, myn owne goode M. Secretary and
refuge, nowe set to your hande that I may come to a laudable
ende and reposse; seyng that I may be furnyshyd aftyr suche a
sorte and maner as I may ende my short tyme and lyff to the
honor of Cryst's Churche and the Prince. And, besydys my dayly
prayer and true hert, I shal so requyte your kyndnes as ye shal
haue cause to thyncke the same to be wel imployed, lycke as my
seyde trusty frende shal more amply shewe unto yow to whom yt
may please yow to give for me credens and loving audience: and I
shall pray for the increase of your honor. Wryttyn at Asher with
the tremylling hand and hevy hart of your assuryd lover and
bedysman.
   T. Car=lis= Ebor.
To the rygth honorable and my synguler goode frende Master
Secretary.

<Q OR2 1520S? TWOLSEY>
<A THOMAS WOLSEY>
<G M>
<P 7>
[} [\LETTER CIV. CARDINAL WOLSEY TO DR. STEPHEN GARDENER.\] }]
   My owne goode mastyr Secretary aftyr my moste herty
commendacons I pray you at the reverens of God to help, that
exspedicion be usyd in my presents, the delay wherof so
replenyssheth my herte with hevynes, that I can take no reste;
nat for any vayne fere, but onely for the miserabli condycion
that I am presently yn, and lyclyhod to contynue in the same
onles that ye, in whom ys myn assuryd truste, do help and releve
me therein; for fyrst contynuyng here in thys moweste and
corrupt eyer, beyng enteryd in to the passyon of the dropsy,
(\cum prostratione appetitus, et continuo insompnus\) , I cannat
lyve; wherfor of necessyte I muste be removyd to summe other
dryer eyer and place, wher I may have comodyte of Physycyans.
Secondly havyng but Yorke, wych ys now decayd by viijC.=li= by
the yeere I can nat tell how to lyve and kepe the poore nombyr
of folks wych I nowe have; my howsys ther be in decay, and of
every thyng mete for howsold onprovidyd and furnyshyd. I have
non apparell for my howsys ther, nor money to bryng me
<P 8>
thether, nor to lyve with tyl the propysse tyme of the year shal
come to remove thither. Thes thyngs consyderyd, M=r=. Secretary,
must nedys make me in agony and hevynes; myn age therwith and
sycknes consyderyd. Alas M=r=. Secretary, ye with other my
lordys shewyd me that I shuld otherwyse be furnyshyd, and seyn
unto. Ye knowe in your lernyng and consyens whether I shuld
forfit my spiritualties of Wynchester or no. Alas the qualytes
of myn offencys consyderyd, with the gret punisshement and losse
of goodes that I have sustignyd, owt to move petyfull hertys.
And the moste nobyl Kyng, to whom yf yt wold please yow of your
cherytabli goodnes to shew the premyses aftyr your accustomable
wysdom and dexteryte, yt ys nat to be dowettyd but hys Hyhnes
wold have consyderacon and compassion, aggmentyng my lyvyng, and
appoyntyng such thyngs as shuld be convenyent for my furniture;
wych to do shalbe to the Kyngs high honer, meryte, and dyscharge
of consyens; and to yow gret praysse for the bryngyng of the
same to passe for your olde brynger up and lovyng frende. Thys
kyndnes exibite from the Kyngs Hyghnes shal prolong my lyff for
sum lytyl whyl, thow yt shall nat be long; by the meane wherof
hys Grace shal take profygtt, and by my deth non. What ys yt to
hys Hyhnes to geve summe convenyent porcion owt of Wynchester
and Seynt Albons, hys Grace takyng with my herty good wyl the
<P 9>
resydue. Remembyr, good M=r=. Secretary, my poore degre and what
servys I have done: and how nowe approchyng to deth I must begyn
the world ageyn. I beseche yow therfor, movyd with pity and
compassyon, soker me in thys my calamyti, and to your power,
wych I do knowe ys gret, releve me: and I with all myn shall not
onely ascrybe thys my relef unto yow, but also pray to God for
the increase of your honor. And as my poore shal increase, so I
shal not fayle to acquyte yo=r= kyndnes. Wryttyn hastely at
Asher with the rude and shackyng hand of your dayly bedysman and
assuryd frende.
   T. Car=lis=. Ebor.
   To the rygth honorable And my assuryd frende Mastyr
Secretary.

<Q OR2 1520S? TWOLSEY>
<A THOMAS WOLSEY>
<G M>
<P 10>
[} [\LETTER CV. CARDINAL WOLSEY TO SECRETARY GARDENER.\] }]
   My owne goode mastyr Secretary goyng this day owt of my pue
to sey masse, your lettres datyd yesternygth at London wer
delyveryd unto me, by the contynue wherof I undyrstand that the
Kyngs Hyhnes of hys excellent goodnes and cheryte ys contentyd
that I shal inyoy and have the admynistracon of Yorke merly,
with the gyftts of the promocyons spiritual and temporall of the
same; reservyd onely onto hys nobyll Grace the gyft of v or vj
of the best promoco~ns: and that hys pleasure ys I shal leve
Wynchester and Saynt Albons. As hereonto Master Secretary I can
nat expresse howe moche I am bowndyn to the Kyngs Royal Maieste
for thys hys gret and bowntawse liberalyte, reputyng the same to
be moche more than I schal evyr be abyl to deserve. Howbeyt yf
hys Maieste, consyderyng the short and lytyl tyme that I shal
lyve here in thys world, by the reason of suche hevynes as I
have conceyved in my hert, with the minyuose of the olde howsys,
and the decay of the seyd archbyshoprych at the lest to the
summe of viij C marcke yerely, by the reason of the Act passyd
for fynys of testaments; with also min long peynful servys and
poore
<P 11>
degre; and for the declaracion of hys Graces excellent cheryte,
yf hys hyhnes be myndyd I shal leve Wynchester and Saynt Albons
wych I supposyd when I made my Submyssyan, not offendyng in my
treweth towards hys royal parson, dygnyti, or majeste royal, I
shuld not now have deservyd to have left; and moche the more
knowyng hys Graces excellent propensyon to pyte and mercy, and
rememberyng of the francke departyng with of all that I had in
thys world; that I may have summe convenyent pencion reservyd
unto me, suche as the Kyngs hyhnes of hys nobyl charite shal
thynke mete; so orderyng hys that shal succede and my lyvyng,
that the same may be of lyck value yeerly and exstent. Wherat my
trust ys and my herte so gevyth me, that hys Majeste wole make
no dyfficultie yf yt may lycke yow frendly to propone the same;
assuryng yow that I desyre nat thys for any mynde, God ys my
jugge, that I have to accumulat good, or desyre that I have to
the muke of the world; sen God be thankyd, at this ower, I set
no more by the ryches and promocyons of the world than by the
roshe undyr my fote; but onely for the declaration of the Kyngs
honor and hyhe charyte, and to have wherewith, to do good dedys,
and to helpe my poore servants and kynnysfolks. And furthermore
that yt wold please the Kyngs excellent goodnes by your freindly
medyacion, consyderyng how slendyrly I am furnyshyd in my Howse,
nowe specially that the apparell
<P 12>
of Wynchester and Saynt Albons shalbe takyn from me, to geve and
appoynt on to me a convenyent fernyture for the same, (\non ad
pompam sed necessariam honestatem\) : and yf I may have the free
gyft and dyssposycion of the benefyces, yt shalbe gretly to my
comfort. And yet when any of the v or vj princypall shal fortune
to be voyd, the Kyngs Grace beyng myndyd to have any of them,
hys hyhnes shalbe as sure of the same as thougth they wer
reservyd. And thus by hys nobyl and mercyful goodnes delyveryd
owt of extreme calamyte, and restoryd to a newe fredome, I
shall, with Gods mercy and help, so ordyr my lyff, that I trust
hys Majeste shal take special comfort theran, and be pleasyd
with the same. (\Spero quod haec quae peto non videbuntur
magna.\) Howbeyt I moste humbly submyt and refferre all my
petycions, (\immo ipsam vitam\) , to hys gracyous ordynance and
pleasure, prayng yow to declare and sygnyfye the same, supplying
myn indyssposcycon and lack of wyt conceyvyd by reason of my
extreme sorowe and hevynes, that the same may be to the Kyngs
contentacion; whom I had lever be ded than to ofende in worde,
thowgth, or dede. And as towchyng the grantyng of the fee of one
C=li= for M=r=. Nores duryng hys lyff for hys good servys done
unto the Kyng's hyhnes, for the wych I have alweyes lovyd hym,
and for the singler good hert and mynde that I knowe he hath
allweys borne unto me, I am content to make owt my graunte
<P 13>
opon the same, ye and yt wol please the Kyng to inlarge yt to
one C=li= more: and semblably, cause M. Thesauror hath the
kepyng of the Kyngs game nygth to Fernam, I wold gladly yf yt
may stand with the Kyngs pleasure grawnte onto hym the revercion
of such thinges as the lorde Sands hath ther, with the
ampliacion of the fee, above that wych ys oldely accustomyd, to
the summe of xl=li= by the yeer: and also I wold gladly geve to
M=r=. Comptroller a lycke ffee: and to M=r=. Russell anothyr of
xx=li= by the yeere: remyttyng thys and all other my suts to the
Kyng's Hyhnes pleasure, mercy, pity, and compassyon moste holly.
Besechyng hys Hyhnes so nowe gracyously to ordyr me that I may
from hens forth serve God quyetly and with reposse of mynd, and
pray as I am moste bowndyn for the conservacion and increase of
hys most nobyll and royal astat. And thus with my dayly prayer I
byd yow farewell. From Asher hastely, with the rude hand and
moste hevy hert of yowr assuryd frend and bedysman
   T. Car=lis= Ebor.
To the rygth honorable M=r= Secretary, in hast.

<Q OR2 1530S? TFRYSBY>
<A THOMAS FRYSBY>
<G M>
<P 20>
[} [\LETTER CVIII. THOMAS FRYSBY TO THOMAS CROMWELL.\] }]
<P 21>
   Right worshipfull my singuler good Master my duety humbly
premised with my prayer. Pleasith it your good Mastership of
your goodnes to call to your remembraunce when ye laye here with
us at Launde Abbey some tyme ye wolde take the payne to walke
with me or my brethern abowt owr busynes; and as you and I cam
on day from Withcoke I had a fall backeward in the Snowe in a
place called the Dammes, betwen Launde and Withcoke; and by the
same tokyn I doo send you by this berar vj. Chesys of this
contre makyng, praying you to accepte the same that the old
acquentaunce somme thyng myght be renewed. You shall nott nede
to gyve our M=r=. prior eny thanks for the same. Other newellies
have I not to doo your Mastership pleasur with all, but with my
prayer which all wayes ye shalbe assuryd of to the pleasure of
God, who all wayes have you in his blessid kepyng, to your harts
ease and your worship daily encreasyng. At Laund Abbey this
xiiij=th=. daye of January
   By your beadisman
   Thomas Frysby chanon.
   To the right worshipfull M. Cromwell be this delyvered.

<Q OR2 1533 TCRANMER>
<A THOMAS CRANMER>
<G M>
<P 33>
[} [\LETTER CXIV. THOMAS CRANMER ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, TO
MR. HAWKYNS THE AMBASSADOR AT THE EMPEROR'S COURT.\] }]
<P 34>
   In my most hartie wise I commende me unto you and even so
woulde be right gladd to here of your welfare, &c. Thes be to
advertise you that inasmoche
<P 35>
as you nowe and than take some paynes in writyng vnto me, I
woulde be lothe you shuld thynke your Labour utterly lost and
forgotten for lake of wrytyng agayne; therefore and bycause I
reken you be somedele desirous of suche newis as hathe byn here
with us of late in the Kyngis Graces matters, I entend to
enforme you a parte therof accordyng to the tenure and purporte
vsyd in that behalf.
   Ande fyrste as towchyng the small determynacion and
concludyng of the matter of devorse betwene my Lady Kateren and
the Kyngs Grace, whiche said matter after the Convocacion in
that behalf hadde determyned and aggreed accordyng to the former
consent of the Vniversites, yt was thowght convenient by the
Kyng and his lernyd Councell that I shuld repayre unto
Dunstable, which ys within iiij. myles vnto Amptell, where the
said Lady Kateren kepeth her howse, and there to call her before
me, to here the fynall Sentance in this said mateir.
Notwithstandyng she would not att all obey therunto, for whan
she was by doctour Lee cited to appear by a daye, she utterly
refused the same, sayinge that inasmoche as her cause was before
the Pope she would have none other judge; and therfore woulde
not take me for her judge. Nevertheless the viij=th= daye of
Maye, accordyng to the said appoyntment, I came vnto Dunstable,
my Lorde of Lyncoln beyng assistante vnto me, and my Lorde of
Wyncehester, Doctour Bell, Doctour
<P 36>
Claybroke, Doctour Trygonnel, Doctour Hewis, Doctour Olyver,
Doctour Brytten, Mr. Bedell, with diuerse other lernyd in the
Lawe beyng councellours in the Lawe for the King's parte: and
soo there at our commyng kepte a Courte for the apperance of the
said Lady Kateren, where were examyned certeyn witnes whiche
testified that she was lawfully cited and called to appere,
whome for fawte of apperance was declared contumax; procedyng in
the said cause agaynste her (\in paenam contumaciam\) as the
processe of the Lawe thereunto belongeth; whiche contynewed xv.
dayes after our cummyng thither. And the morow after Assension
daye I gave finall Sentance therin, howe that it was
indispensable for the Pope to lycense any suche marieges.
   This donne, and after our reiornyng home agayne, the Kings
Highnes prepared al thyngs convenient for the Coronacion of the
Queene, whiche also was after suche a maner as foloweth.
   The Thursdaye nexte before the feaste of Pentecost, the Kyng
and the Queene beyng at Grenewyche, all the Craftes of London
thereunto well appoynted, in severall bargis deckyd after the
most gorgiouse and sumptuous maner, with dyverse pagiantes
thereunto belongyng, repayred and wayted all together upon the
Mayre of London; and so, well furnysshed, cam all vnto
Grenewiche, where they taryed and wayted for
<P 37>
the Queenes commyng to her barge: which so done, they brought
her unto the Tower, tromppets, shambes, and other dyverse
instrumentes all the wayes playng and makyng greate melodie,
which, as ys reported, was a combly donne as neuer was lyke in
any tyme nyghe to our rememberaunce. And so her Grace cam to the
Tower on Thursdaye at nyghte, abowte v. of the clocke, where
also was suche a pele of gonnes as hathe not byn harde lyke a
great while before. And the same nyghte, and Frydaye aldaye, the
Kyng and Queene taryed there; and on Frydaye at nyght the Kyngs
Grace made xviij knyghts of the Bathe, whose creacion was not
alonly so strange to here of, as also their garmentes stranger
to beholde or loke on; whiche said Knightes, the nexte daye,
whiche was Saturday, rydde before the Queene's grace thorowte
the Citie of London towards Westminster palice, over and besyds
the moste parte of the nobles of the Realme, whiche lyke
accompanied her grace thorowe owte the said citie; she syttyng
in her heere, upon a Horse Lytter, rychely appareled, and iiij
knyghtes of the v. ports beryng a Canapye over her hedd. And
after her cam iiij. riche charettes, one of them emptie, and
iij. other furnysshed with diuerse auncient old lades; and after
them cam a great trayne of other Ladies and gyntillwomen: whyche
said Progresse, from the begynnyng to thendyng, extendid
<P 38>
half a myle in leyngthe by estimacion or thereaboute. To whome
also, as she came alongeste the Citie, was shewid many costely
pagiants, with diverse other encomyes spoken of chyldren to her;
wyne also runyng at certeyne Condits plentiously. And so
procedyng thorowte the streats, passid furthe vnto Westminster
Hall, where was a certeyn banket prepared for her, which donne,
she was conveyd owte of the bake syde of the palice into a Barge
and so vnto Yorke Place, where the Kyng's grace was before her
comyng, for this you muste ever presuppose that his Grace came
allwayes before her secretlye in a Barge aswell frome Grenewyche
to the Tower as from the Tower to Yorke place.
   Nowe than on Soundaye was the Coronacion, which allso was of
such a maner.
   In the mornynge ther assembled withe me at Westminster
Churche the bysshop of Yorke, the Bishop of London, the Bishop
of Wynchester, the Bishop of Lyncoln, the Bishop of Bathe, and
the Bishop of Saint Asse, the Abbote of Westminstre with x or
xij moo Abbottes, whiche all revestred ourselfs in our
pontificalibus, and, soo furnysshed, withe our Crosses and
Crossiers, procedid oute of th'Abbey in a procession unto
Westminstre Hall, where we receyved the Queene apareled in a
Robe of purple velvet, and all the ladyes and gentillwomen in
robes and gownes of scarlet accordyng to the maner vsed before
tyme
<P 39>
in suche besynes: and so her Grace sustayned of eche syde with
ij=to= bysshops, the Bysshope of London ande the Bysshop of
Wynchester, came furthe in processyon unto the Churche of
Westminster, she in her here, my Lord of Suffolke berying before
herr the Crowne, and ij=to= other Lords beryng also before her a
Ceptur and a white Rodde, and so entred up into the highe Alter,
where diverse Ceremoneys used aboute her, I did sett the Crowne
on her hedde, and then was songe (\Te Deum\) , &c. And after
that was song a solempne Masse, all which while her grace satt
crowned upon a scaffold whiche was made betwene the Highe Alter
and the Qwyer in Westminstre Churche; which Masse and ceremonyes
donne and fynysshed, all the Assemble of noble men broughte her
into Westminstre Hall agayne, where was kepte a great solempne
feaste all that daye; the good ordre therof were to longe to
wrytte at this tyme to you. But nowe Sir you may nott ymagyn
that this Coronacion was before her mariege, for she was maried
muche about sainte Paules daye last, as the condicion therof
dothe well appere by reason she ys nowe sumwhat bygg with
chylde. Notwithstandyng yt hath byn reported thorowte a greate
parte of the realme that I maried her; whiche was playnly false,
for I myself knewe not therof a fortenyght after yt was donne.
And many other thyngs be also reported of me, whiche be mere
lyes and tales.
<P 40>
   Other newys have we none notable, but that one Fryth, whiche
was in the Tower in pryson, was appoynted by the Kyngs grace to
be examyned befor me, my Lorde of London, my lorde of
Wynchestre, my Lorde of Suffolke, my Lorde Channcelour, and my
Lorde of Wylteshere, whose opynion was so notably erroniouse,
that we culde not dyspache hym but was fayne to leve hym to the
determynacion of his Ordinarye, whiche ys the bishop of London.
His said opynyon ys of suche nature that he thoughte it nat
necessary to be beleved as an Article of our faythe, that ther
ys the very corporall presence of Christe within the Oste and
Sacramente of the Alter, and holdethe of this poynte muste after
the Opynion of Oecolampadious. And suerly I myself sent for hym
iij or iiij tymes to perswade hym to leve that his Imaginacion,
but for all that we could do therin he woulde not applye to any
counsaile, notwithstandyng nowe he ys at a fynall ende with all
examinacions, for my Lorde of London hathe gyven sentance and
delyuerd hym to the secular power, where he loketh every daye to
goo unto the fyer. And ther ys also condempned with hym one
Andrewe a taylour of London for the said self same opynion. [^A
PASSAGE OMITTED^]
   And thus farr you well, from my manor of Croydon the xvij.
daye of June.

<Q OR2 1535 ABOLEYN>
<A ANNE BOLEYN>
<G F>
<P 45>
[} [\LETTER CXVI. QUEEN ANNE BOLEYN TO THOMAS CROMWELL.\] }]
<P 46>
   Anne the Quene. By the Quene.
   Trustie and right welbiloued we grete you well. And where as
we be crediblie enformed that the berer hereof Richard Herman
marchaunte and citizen of Antwerpe in Brabant was in the tyme of
the late lorde Cardynall put and expelled frome his fredome and
felowshipe of and in the Englishe house there, for nothing ells
(as he affermethe) but oonly for that that he dyd bothe with his
gooddis and pollicie, to his greate hurte and hynderans in this
Worlde, helpe to the settyng forthe of the Newe Testamente in
Englisshe. We therefore desire and instantly praye you that with
all spede and favoure convenient ye woll cause this good and
honeste marchaunt, being my Lordis true faithfull and loving
subjecte, restored to his pristine fredome, libertie, and
felowshipe aforesaid, and the soner at this oure requeste, and
at your good leyser to here hym in suche thinges as he hathe to
make further relacion unto you in this behalf. Yeven undir our
Signete at my Lordis manoure of Grenewiche the xiiij=th= daye of
May.
To our trustie and right welbeloved Thomas Crumwell squyer Chief
Secretary unto my Lorde the Kings Highnes.

<Q OR2 1530S JROCHEFORD>
<A JANE ROCHEFORD>
<G F>
<P 67>
[} [\LETTER CXXIV. LADY ROCHEFORD TO SECRETARY CROMWELL.\] }]
   Mayster Secretory, as a power desolat wydow wythoute
comffort, as to my specyall trust under God and my Pryns, I have
me most humbly recommendyd unto youe; prayng youe, after your
accustemyd gentyll maner to all them that be in suche
lamentabull case as I ame in, to be meane to the Kyngs gracyous
Hyghnes for me for suche power stuffe and plate as my husbonde
had, whome God pardon; that of hys gracyous and mere lyberalyte
I may have hyt to helpe me to my power lyvyng, whiche to his
Hyghnes ys nothynge to be regardyd, and to me schuld be a most
hygh helpe and souccor. And farther more, where that the
<P 68>
Kyngs Hyghnes and my Lord my father payed great soms of money
for my Joynter to the Errell of Wyltchere to the some off too
thowsand Marks, and I not assuryd of no more duryng the sayd
Errells naturall lyff then one hundreth Marke; whyche ys veary
hard for me to schyffte the worldd wythall. That youe wyll so
specyally tender me in thys behalff as to enforme the Kyngs
Hyghnes of these premysses, wherby I may the more tenderly be
regardyd of hys gracyous persone, youre Worde in thys schall be
to me a sure helpe: and God schall be to youe therfore a sure
reward, whyche dothe promes good to them that dothe helpe powere
forsaken Wydos. And bothe my prayer and servys schall helpe to
thys duryng my naturall lyff, as most bounden so to doo, God my
wyttnes; whoo ever more preserve you.
   Jane Rocheford.

<Q OR2 1537 JMESSYNDYNE>
<A JANE MESSYNDYNE>
<G F>
<P 74>
[} [\LETTER CXXVII. THE PRIORESS AND CONVENT OF THE CISTERCIAN
NUNNERY OF LEGBORNE IN LINCOLNSHIRE TO THEIR FOUNDER.\] }]
   Right honourable our most synguler Maister and Founder, our
duetie in the humblest wise presupposed, with dayly prayer, as
your perpetuall and religious beedwomen. Please yt your goodnes
to undirstonde, that where as Almyghty God hath indued you w=t=
just title Founder of the Pryory of Legborne to
<P 75>
the great comfort of me and all my systers: we doo and shall
alweyes submit ourselfs to youre most rightuouse commaundement
and ordre, oonly puttyng our comfort in your goodnesse for all
causes concernyng your poure Pryory of Legbourne. And where as
we doo here that a grete nombre of Abbyes shalbe punysshed,
subprest, and put downe bicause of their myslyvyng; and that all
Abbyes and Pryores undir the value of CC=li=. be at our moste
noble Prynce's pleasure to subpresse and put downe. Yet if it
may pleas your goodnes, we trust in God ye shall here no
compleynts agaynst us, nother in our lyvyng nor hospitalitie
kepyng. In consideracion wherof if it may please your goodnes,
in our great necessitie, to be a meane and sewter for your owne
powre Pryory, that it maye be preserved and stond, you shalbe a
more higher Founder to vs than he that first foundid oure Howse.
We have noon othir comfort nor refuge but oonly unto your
goodnes, and we hooly submyt our selfs to the pleasure of God,
to the pleasure of our Prynce, and to the pleasure of you our
Founder; and how soever it shall please God that we shalbe
orderid, we shall continue your faithfull and dayly bedewomen.
As knoweth oure Lorde who ever preserve you to your most
comfort.
   Yo=r= owne dayly beadwomen
   Jane Messyndyne (^Pryores and^) sisters (^of the^) pryory
(^of^) Legborne.

<Q OR2 1530S? JLONDON>
<A JOHN LONDON>
<G M>
<P 79>
[} [\LETTER CXXIX. DR. JOHN LONDON TO LORD CROMWELL.\] }]
   In my most humble maner I have me commendyd unto yowr gude
lordeschippe, acertenyng the same that I have pullyd down the
Image of o=r= Ladye at Caversham wherunto wasse great
pilgremage. The Image ys platyd over with sylver, and I have
putte yt in a cheste fast lackyd and naylyd uppe, and by the
next bardge that commythe from Reding to London yt shall be
browght to yo=r= Lordeschippe. I have also pullyd down the place
she stode in w=t= all other ceremonyes, as lights, schrds,
crowchys, and imagies of wex hangyng abowt the chapel, and have
defacyed the same thorowly in exchuyng of any farther resortt
thedyr. Thys chapell dydde belong to Notley abbey, and ther
always wasse a chanon of that monastery wiche wasse callyd the
Warden of Caversham, and he songe in thys chapell and hadde the
offerings for hys lyving. He wasse acustomyd to schew many prety
relyks,
<P 80>
among the wiche wer (as he made reportt) the holy dager that
kylled Kinge Henry; and the holy knyfe that kylled Seynt
Edwarde. All thees w=t= many other, with the cots of thys image,
her cappe and here, my servant shall bring unto yo=r=
Lordeshippe thys weke w=t= the Surrendre of the Freers undre
ther covent seale, and ther seale also. I have sent the chanon
home agen to Notleye, and have made fast the doores of the
chapell, wiche ys thorowly well covered with ledde: and if it be
yo=r= lordeships pleasur I shall se yt made suer to the Kings
Grace's use. And if it be nott so orderyd, the chapell stondith
so wildely that the ledde will be stolyn by nyzt, as I wasse
servyd at the Fryers; for as soon as I hadde taken the Fryers
surrendre, the multytude of the poverty of the Town resortyd
thedyr and all thinge that myzt be hadde they stole away:
insomyche that they hadde convayd the very clapers of the
bellys. And saving that M. Fachell, wiche made me great chere at
hys howse, and the Mayer dydde assist me they wolde have made no
litell spoyle. In thys I have don as moche as I cowde do to save
every thing to the Kings graces use, as shall apper to yo=r=
Lordeschippe at the begynnyng of the terme, Godde willing, who
w=t= increse of moche honor long preserve yo=r= gudde
Lordeschippe.
   At Redinge (\xvij=o= Septembris\) .
   At Caversham ys a propre lodginge wher the chanon lay, with a
fayer garden and an orcherd mete to be
<P 81>
bestowed upon som frynde of yo=r= lordeschips in thees parties;
for the chanon had no thing to do ther butt to kepe the chapell
and receyve the offrings.
   I besek your gudde Lordeschippe to admytt me a powr sutar for
thees honest men of Redinge. They have a fayer town and many
gudde occupiers in ytt; butt they lacke that howse necessary, of
the wiche for the mynystration of Justice thay have most nede
of. Ther Town Hall ys a very small Howse and stondith upon the
ryver, wher ys the commyn wassching place of the most part of
the Town; and in the cession dayes and other cowrt dayes ther ys
such betyng with batildores, as oon man can nott here another,
nor the guest here the chardg gevyng. The body of the Church of
the Grey fryers, wiche ys selyd with laths and lyme, wold be a
very commodoise rowme for them. And now I have rydde all the
fasschen of that Churche in parcloses, ymages, and awlters, it
wolde mak a gudly Town Hall. The Mayer of that Town, M=r=
Richard Turner, a very honest jentill person with many other
honest men hathe expressyd unto me ther gref in thys behalf, and
have desyred me to be an humble sutar unto your Lordeschippe for
the same if it schulde be solde. The wallys, besyd the coyne
stonys, be butt chalk and flynt, and the coveryng butt tile. And
if it please the King's Grace to bestow that howse upon any of
hys servants, he may spare the body of the
<P 82>
churche, wich stondith next the strete, very well; and yet have
rowme sufficient for a great man.
   Your most bounden orator and servant,
   John London.

<Q OR2 1530S? JFOSTER>
<A JOHN FOSTER>
<G M>
<P 111>
[} [\LETTER CXLI. JOHN FOSTER TO LORD CROMWELL.\] }]
   In my most humblyst wyse, I beyng not so bold as to appere
before youre Lordshyp untyll your plesure
<P 112>
ys knowyn, feere sett appartt, nede compellythe me to wrytt.
Thys last Lentt I dyd no lesse then wrytt, and also to your
presence I dyd approche, suyng for your lordschyppys gracious
servyce; but now my sute ys muche other, for my dysfortune hathe
byn to have conceyvyd untruly Goddys worde, and not only with
yntellectyon to have thought yt, but exteryally and really I
have fulfyllyd the same; for I, as then beyng a preste, have
accompleschyd maryage; nothyng pretendyng but as an obedyentt
subyect. For yf the Kyngys Grace could have founde yt lawfull
that prestys mught have byn maryd, they wold have byn to the
Crowne dubbyll and dubbyll faythefull, furst in love, secondly
for fere that the Bysshope of Rome schuld sette yn hys powre
unto ther desolacyon. But now by the noyse of the peopull I
perseyve I have dunne amysce, which saythe that the Kyngy
serudyte yugementt with all hys cowncell temperall and
spyrytuall hathe stableschyd a contrary order, that all prestys
schalbe separat by a day; with which order I have contentyd my
selfe: and as sone as I herd it to be tru, I sentt the woman to
her frendys iij. score mylys from me, and spedely and with all
celeryte I have resorted hether to desyre the Kyngs Hyghtnes of
hys favor and absolucyon for my amysce doyng; prayng and
besechyng your Lordschypps gracyous cumfortt for the optaynyng
of hys gracyous pardon: and I schalbe your bounden servauntt yn
hartt and also yn
<P 113>
contynnuall servyse yf yt schall please your gracyous lordschypp
to accept yt duryng my lyfe: wrythyn the xviij. day of June.
   Your bounden for ever,
   John Foster.

<Q OR2 1540S 10LADIES>
<A TEN LADIES>
<G F>
<P 126>
[} [\LETTER CXLVI. TEN LADIES OF THE COURT, TO KING HENRY THE
EIGHTH.\] }]
   Most gratiouse and benigne sovraigne Lorde, please it your
Highnes to understonde that wee have seene and beene in your
newe Greate Shippe, and the rest of your shippes at
Portismowth, wiche arr things so goodlie to beeholde, that, in
our liefs wee have not seene (excepting your royall person and
my lord the Prince your sonne) a more pleasaunt sight; for
wiche, and the most bountiful gifts, the chere and most
gratiouse enterteignment, wich your Grace hath vouchsavid to
bestowe upon us your most unworthie and humble servaunts, wee
rendre and send unto the same our most humble and entier thanks
wich wee beseche
<P 127>
your Ma=tie= to acceept in good parte, advertising the same that
there rest nowe but only ij. sorowes; the tone for lacke of
your royall presence that ye might have seene your said Shippes,
nowe at this tyme whan wee might have waited on you here; the
toodre that wee thinke long til it may eftsones lieke you to
have us with you, wiche wee all most hertely beseche our Lord
God may bee shortely; who preserve your most noble person, and
my Lord Prince, and graunte you bothe to reigne over us; Your
Majesty many yeris, His Grace with long continuance but by late
succession, as never Princes did before You. From Your Majesties
havon and towne of Portismowth the iiij=th=. of August.
   Yo=r= Highnes most bounden and humble servaunts, and
beadwomen
   Mabyell Sowthampton Margaret Taylebois, Margrett Howarde,
Alys Browne. Anne Knevytt. Jane Denny. Jane Meows Anne Basset
Elizabeth Tyrwhyt Elsabeth Harvy.

<Q OR2 1546 EDWARD6>
<A EDWARD VI>
<G M>
<P 131>
[} [\LETTER CXLIX. PRINCE EDWARD TO QUEEN CATHERINE PARR.\] }]
   Most honorable and entirely beloued mother, I have me most
humbli recommended to your Grace w=t= lyke thankes, both for
y=t= your Grace did accepte so gentylly my simple and rude
letters, and also y=t= it pleased your Grace so gentylly to
vowchesaufe to directe unto me your louing and tendre letters,
which do geue me much comfort and encouragement to go forward in
such thinges wherein your Grace bereath me on hand, y=t= I am
alredy entered. I pray God I maie be hable in part to satisfy
the good expectation of the Kings Maiesti my father and of your
Grace, whom God have ever in his most blessed keping.
   Your louing sonne
   E. Prince.

<Q OR2 1547 HRADCLIFFE>
<A HENRY RADCLIFFE>
<G M>
<P 137>
[} [\LETTER CLV. HENRY RADCLYF, EARL OF SUSSEX, TO HIS
COUNTESS.\] }]
   Madame with most lovyng and hertie commendacions, thies be to
signifie unto you that our late Soveraigne Lord the King
departed at Westminster uppon Friday last the xxviij=ti=. of
this instant Januarie about two of the clock in the mornyng. And
the Kings Majestie that nowe is proclaymed King this present
last day of the same moneth. And lik as for the departure of
th'on wee may lament, so for th'establisshment of thother to all
our comforts we may rejoyce. The names of his Executours ar
th'archbischop of Canterburie, the Lord Wriothesley lord
Chauncelor of Englond, the Lord St. John lord president of the
Counsaile and Gret Master, the Lord Russell Lord Privie Seale,
the Erle of Hertford lord Great Chamberlein of Englond, the
Viscount Lesley lord Admiral, the bishop of Derham, Mr.
Secretarie Paget, Sir Anthonie Denie, Sir Anthonie Browne, Sir
William Herbert, The Chief Justice of the Common Place, Bromley
another Justice ther, Sir Thomas Baker Chauncelor of the
tenthes, Sir Edward North, and divers other aidours to the same,
which for lak of tyme I pretermit.
<P 138>
The Parliament is clerely dissolved: the Terme and all writs
closed. The Court is nowe at the Tower from whens the Kings
Majestie tomorrow shalbe receyved and conducted to his Hous
Derchamplace. His Hyghnes Coronacion shalbe at Shrovetyme.
   For my oone matiers hetherto, thorough the gret and diligent
busines that my lord Chauncelor hath had, I could espye no tyme
mete to the purpoos; but shal nevertheles as sone as oportunitie
may serve set forth the same. And for your repaire hether in
th'end of this weke I shall send unto you Henry Northey, by whom
you shal knowe my determynat pleasur. In the meane tyme I
require you to put all soch things in order as shalbe mete for
you here.
   Thus, good Madame albeit the contents of your Lettres
diverslie at length tending to the lak of good wil in me that
ought to be in a lovyng husband; the same nevertheles as I think
proceding of a good hert might otherwise have bin qualified I
wisse to you my owne hert as to my self. From Eliplace in
Holborne the last day of January in the first yere of the reigne
of our Soveraigne King Edward the Sixeth.
   Your assured lovyng husbond
   Henry Sussex.
   To my wief The Countas of Sussex.

<Q OR2 1550S? ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 145>
[} [\LETTER CLX. THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH TO KING EDWARD VI=TH=.\]
}]
   Like as a shipman in stormy wether plukes downe the sailes
tarijnge for bettar winde, so did I, most noble Kinge, in my
vnfortunate chanche a thurday pluk downe the hie sailes of my
ioy and comfort and do trust one day that as troblesome waues
have repulsed me bakwarde, so a gentil winde wil bringe me
forwarde to my hauen. Two chief occasions moued me muche and
griued me gretly, the one for that I douted your Maiesties
helthe, the other bicause for al my longe tarijnge I wente
without that I
<P 146>
came for. Of the first I am releued in a parte, bothe that I
vnderstode of your helthe, and also that your Maiesties loginge
is far from my Lorde Marques chamber. Of my other grief I am not
eased, but the best is that whatsoever other folkes wil
suspect, I intende not to feare your graces goodwil, wiche as I
knowe that I never disarued to faint, so I trust wil stil stike
by me. For if your Graces aduis that I shulde retourne (whos wil
is a commandemente) had not bine, I wold not haue made the halfe
of my way, the ende of my iourney. And thus as one desirous to
hire of your Maiesties helth, thogth vnfortunat to se it, I shal
pray God for euer to preserue you. From Hatfilde this present
Saterday.
   Your Maiesties humble sistar to commandemente Elizabeth.
To the Kinges most excellent Maiestie.

<Q OR2 1550S? ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 146>
[} [\LETTER CLXI. THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH TO KING EDWARD
VI=TH=.\] }]
   Like as the richeman that dayly gathereth riches to riches,
and to one bag of mony layeth a greate sort
<P 147>
til it come to infinit, so methinkes your Maiestie, not beinge
suffised withe many benefits and gentilnes shewed to me afore
this time, dothe now increase them in askinge and desiring wher
you may bid and commaunde, requiring a thinge not worthy the
desiringe for it selfe, but made worthy for your Higthnes
request. My pictur I mene, in wiche if the inward good mynde
towarde your grace migth as wel be declared as the outwarde face
and countenaunce shal be seen, I wold nor haue taried the
commandement but preuent it, nor have bine the last to graunt
but the first to offer it. For the face, I graunt, I might wel
blusche to offer, but the mynde I shal neuer be ashamed to
present. For thogth from the grace of the pictur the coulers may
fade by time, may giue by wether, may be spotted by chance; yet
the other nor time with her swift winges shal ouertake, nor the
mistie cloudes with ther loweringes may darken, nor chance with
her slipery fote may ouerthrow. Of this althogth yet the profe
coulde not be greate bicause the occasions hathe bine but smal,
notwithstandinge as a dog hathe a daye, so may I perchaunce have
time to declare it in dides wher now I do write them but in
wordes. And further I shal most humbly beseche your Maiestie
that whan you shal loke on my pictur, you wil witsafe to thinke
that as you haue but the outwarde shadow of the body afore you,
so my inward
<P 148>
minde wischeth that the body it selfe wer oftner in your
presence; howbeit bicause bothe my so beinge I thinke coulde do
your Maiestie litel pleasur, thogth my selfe great good; and
againe bicause I se as yet not the time agreing therunto, I shal
lerne to folow this sainge of Orace, " (\Feras non culpes quod
vitari non potest.\) " And thus I wil (troblinge your Maiestie
I fere) ende with my most humble thankes. Besechinge God longe
to preserue you to his honour, to your comfort, to the realmes
profit, and to my joy. From Hatfilde this 15 day of May.
   Your Maiesties most humbly sistar Elizabeth.

<Q OR2 1550S? EDWARD6>
<A EDWARD VI>
<G M>
<P 148>
[} [\LETTER CLXII. KING EDWARD THE SIXTH, TO THE DUKE OF
SOMERSET.\] }]
   Derest Vncle, by your lettres and reporte of the messenger,
we have at good length vnderstanded to our great comfort, the
good success it hathe pleased God to graunt vs against the
Scottes by your good courage and wise forsight; for the wich and
other the benefites of God heaped vpon vs, like as we ar most
bounden to yeld him most humble thankes, and to
<P 149>
seke bi all waies we mai his true honour, so do we give unto
you, good Vncle, our most hartie thankes, praying you to thanke
also most hartelie in our name our good Cosin therle of Warwike,
and all the othere of the noble men, gentlemen, and others that
have served in this iournei, of whose service, they shall all be
well assured, we will not (God graunte us lief) shew our selfes
vnmindfull, but be redy ever to consider the same as anie
occasion shall serve. Yeven at our house of Otlandes, the
eighteneth of September.
   Your good neuew Edward.
To our derest Vncle the Duke of Somerset.

<Q OR2 1547 MARY1>
<A QUEEN MARY>
<G F>
<P 149>
[} [\LETTER CLXIII. THE PRINCESS MARY TO THE LORD ADMIRAL
SEYMOUR.\] }] 
<P 150>
   My lorde after my harty commendacions theyse shalbe to
declare to you that accordyng to your accoustomed gentilnes I
have receyved six warrants from you by your seruant thys berer,
for the whiche I do gyve you my harty thanks; by whom also I
have receyved your lettre, wherin (as me thynketh) I parceyv
strange newes concernyng a sewte you have in hande to the Quene
for maryage; for the soner obtayneng wherof you seme to thynke
that my lettres myghte do you pleasure. My lorde in thys case, I
truste, your wysdome doth consyder, that, if it weer for my
nereste kynsman & dereste frend on lyve, of all other creatures
in the worlde, it standeth lest w=t= my poore honoure to be a
medler in thys matter, consyderyng whose wyef her grace was of
late; and besyds that, if she be mynded to grawnt your sewte, my
lettres shall do you but small pleasure. On the other syde, if
the remembrance of the Kyngs mayestye my father (whose soule God
pardon) wyll not suffre her to grawnt your sewte, I am nothyng
able to perswade her to forget the losse of hyme, who is as yet
very rype in myn owne remembrance. Wherfore I shall moste
earnestlye requyre you (the premysses consydered) to thynke non
vnkyndnes in me, thoughe I refuse to be a medler any wayes in
thys matter, assuryng you, that (woweng matters set aparte,
wherin I beeng a mayde am nothyng connyng) if otherwayes it
shall lye in my litle power to do you playser, I
<P 151>
shalbe as gladde to do it, as you to requyre it, both for hys
blodds sake that you be of, and also for the gentylnes whiche I
have alwayes fownde in you. As knoweth almyghty God, to whose
tuicyon I commytte you. From Wansted thys Saterday at nyghte
beeng the iiij=th= of June.
   Your assured frend to my power, Marye.

<Q OR2 1547 CPARR>
<A CATHERINE PARR>
<G F>
<P 151>
[} [\LETTER CLXIV. THE QUEEN DOWAGER TO THE LORD ADMIRAL
SEYMOUR.\] }] 
   My lord
   As I gether by your Letter delyvered to my brother Harbert,
ye ar in sum fere how to frame my lord your brother to speke in
your favour; the denyall of yowr request schall make hys foly
more manyfest to the world, wyche wyll more greve me than the
want of hys spekyng. I wold not wyssche yow importune for hys
good wyll, yf yt com nott frankely at the fyrst, yt schalbe
suffycyent ones to have requyre yt, and
<P 152>
after to cesse. I wold desyre ye myght obtayne the Kynge's
Letters in yowre favour, and also the ayde and furtherans of the
moost notable of the Counsell, suche as ye schall thynke
convenyent, wyche thynge obtayned schalbe no small schame to
yowr brother and lovyng syster, in case they do not the lyke. My
Lord where as ye charge me w=t= apromys wryttin w=t= myne one
hand, to chaunge the two yeres into two monethes, I thynke ye
have no suche playne sentence wrytten w=t= my hand; I knowe not
wether ye be aparaphryser or not, yf ye be lerned in that syence
yt ys possyble ye may of one worde make ahole sentence, and yett
nott at all tymes after the true meanyng of the wryter; as yt
aperyth by thys your exposycyon apon my wryttyng. Whan yt shalbe
yowr pleasur to repayre hether ye must take sum payne to come
erly in the mornyng, that ye may be gone agayne by seven aclocke
and so I suppose ye may come without suspect. I pray yow lett me
have knowlege ver nyght at what hower ye wyll come, that yowr
porteresse may wayte at the gate to the feldes for yow. And thus
wyth my most humble and harty comendatyons I take my leve of yow
for thys tyme gyvyng yow lyke thankes for yowr comyng to the
court whan I was there. From Chelsey.
   I wyll kepe in store tyll I speke w=t= yow my lordes
<P 153>
large offer for Fausterne, at wyche tyme I schalbe glad to knowe
your further pleasur therein.
   By her y=t= ys and schalbe yowr humble true and lovyng wyffe
duryng her lyf
   Kateryn the Quene. K. P.

<Q OR2 1548 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 153>
[} [\LETTER CLXV. THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH TO THE PROTECTOR
SOMERSET.\] }] 
   My Lorde I have a requeste to make unto your Grace wiche
feare has made me omitte til this time for two causes, the one
bicause I sawe that my request for the rumors wiche were sprede
abrode of me toke so litel place, wiche thinge whan I considered
I thogth I shulde litel profit in any other sute, howbeit now I
<P 154>
understande that ther is a Proclamacion for them (for the wiche
I give your Grace and the rest of the counsel most humble
thankes) I am the bolder to speake for a nother thinge; and the
other was bicause paraventure your Lordeship and the rest of the
Counsel wil thinke that I favor her ivel doinge for whome I shal
speake for, wiche is for Kateryn Aschiley, that it wolde please
your grace and the rest of the Counsel to be good unto her.
Wiche thing I do not to favor her in any ivel, (for that I wolde
be sorye to do,) but for thes consideracions wiche folowe, the
wiche hope dothe teache me in sainge that I ought not to doute
but that your Grace and the rest of the Counsel wil thinke that
I do it for thre other consideracions. First, bicause that she
hathe bene with me a longe time, and manye years, and hathe
taken great labor, and paine in brinkinge of me up in lerninge
and honestie, and therfore I ougth of very dewtye speke for her,
for Saint Gregorie sayeth that we ar more bounde to them that
bringeth us up wel than to our parents, for our parents do that
wiche is natural for them, that is bringeth us into this Worlde;
but our brinkers up ar a cause to make us live wel in it. The
seconde is bicause I thinke that whatsoever she hathe done in my
Lorde Admirals matter as concerninge the marijnge of me, she
dide it bicause knowinge him to be one of the Counsel, she
thogth he wolde not go about any suche thinge without he had the
Counsels consent
<P 155>
therunto; for I have harde her manye times say that she wolde
never have me mary in any place without your Graces and the
Counsels consente. The thirde cause is bicause that it shal and
doth make men thinke that I am not clere of the dide myselfe,
but that it is pardoned in me bicause of my youthe, bicause that
she I loved so wel is in suche a place. Thus hope prevailinge
more with me than feare, hath wone the battel; and I have at
this time gone furth with it. Wiche I pray God be taken no other
wais that it is mente. Writen in hast. Frome Hatfilde this 7 day
of Marche. Also if I may be so bolde not offendinge I beseche
your Grace and the rest of the Counsel to be good to master
Aschiley her husbonde, wiche bicause he is my kindesman I wold
be glad he shulde do well.
   Your assured frende to my litel power Elizabeth.
To my verey good Lorde my Lorde Protector.

<Q OR2 1549 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 155>
[} [\LETTER CLXVI. THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH TO THE LORD
PROTECTOR.\] }] 
<P 156>
   My Lorde havinge reseuede your Lordeships letters, I parceve
in them your goodwil towarde me bicause you declare to me
plainlie your mynde in this thinge; and againe for that you
wolde not wische that I shulde do any thinge that shulde not
seme good unto the Counsel, for the wiche thinge I give you most
hartie thankes. And wheras I do understande that you do take in
ivel parte the letters that I did write unto your Lordeshipe, I
am verye sorie that you shulde take them so for my mynde was to
declare unto you plainlie as I thoght in that thinge, wiche I
did also the more willingelye bicause (as I write to you) you
desired me to be plaine with you in al thinges. And as
concerninge that pointe that you write that I seme to stande in
my none witte in beinge so wel assured of my none selfe, I did
assure me of my selfe nomore than I trust the trueth shal trie;
and to say that wiche I knewe of my selfe I did not thinke
shulde have displeased the Counsel or your Grace. And surelye
the cause whie that I was sorye that ther shulde be anye suche
aboute me, was bicause that I thogth the people wil say that I
deserved throwgth my lewde demenure to have such a one, and not
that I mislike any thinge that your Lordeshipe or the Counsel
shal thinke good, for I knowe that you and the Counsel ar
charged with me; or that I tak upon me to rule my selfe, for I
knowe the ar most disceved that trusteth most in themselves,
wherfore I trust you shal never finde that faute in me, to
<P 157>
the wiche thinge I do not se that your Grace has made anye
directe answere at this time, and seinge the make so ivel
reportes alreadie, shalbe but a increasinge of ther ivel tonges.
Howbeit you did write that if I wolde bringe forthe anye that
had reported it, You and the Counsel wolde se it redreste, wiche
thinge thogth I can easelye do it, I wolde be lothe to do it for
bicause it is my none cause; and, againe, that shulde be but a
bridinge of a ivel name of me that am glade to ponesse them, and
so get the ivel wil of the people, wiche thinge I wolde be lothe
to have. But if it mougth so seme good unto your Lordeshipe and
the reste of the Counsel to sende forthe a proclamation in to
the countries that the refraine ther tonges, declaringe how the
tales be but lies, it shulde make bothe the people thinke that
You and the Counsel have great regarde that no suche rumors
shulde be spreade of anye of the Kinges Maiesties Sisters, as I
am, thougth vnwordie, and also I shulde thinke myselfe to receve
suche frendeshipe at your handes as you have promised me,
althogth your Lordeship hathe shewed me greate alreadie. Howbeit
I am aschamed to aske it anye more, bicause I se you ar not so
wel minded therunto. And as concerninge that you saye that I
give folkes occasion to thinke in refusinge the good to vpholde
the ivel, I am not of so simple understandinge, nor I wolde that
your Grace shulde have so ivel a opinion of me that I have so
litel
<P 158>
respecte to my none honestie that I wolde mainteine it if I had
souficiente promis of the same, and so your Grace shal prove me
whan it comes to the pointe. And thus I bid you farewel,
desiringe God alwais to assiste you in al your affaires. Writen
in hast. Frome Hatfelde this 21 of Februarye.
   Your assured frende to my litel power Elizabeth.
To my verey good Lorde my Lorde Protector.

<Q OR2 1551 MARY1>
<A QUEEN MARY>
<G F>
<P 176>
[} [\LETTER CLXXVI. THE PRINCESS MARY TO KING EDWARD THE
SIXTH.\] }] 
   My dutye moste humbly remembred unto your Majestie. It maye
please the same to be advertysed that I have by my servantes
receaved your moste honorable Letter, the contentes wherof doe
not a litle trouble me, and so much the more for that any of my
servants should move or attempte me in matteres towching my
sowle, which I thinke the meaneste subjecte within your Realme
could evell beare at their servantes hande; havinge for my parte
utterly refused heretofor to talke with them in such matteres,
and of all other persones leaste regarded them therein; to whom
I have declared what I thinke as she which trusted that your
<P 177>
Majestie would have suffered me your poore humble sister and
beadeswoman to have used the accustomed Masse, which the Kinge
your father and myne with all his predecessores evermore used;
wherin also I have been brought upp from my youth, and therunto
my conscyence doth not only bynde me, which by noe meanes will
suffer me to thinke one thing and do another, but also the
promise made to the Emperore by your Majesties Counsell was an
assurance to me that in so doinge I should not offend the Lawes,
although they seeme now to quallefye and deny the thing.
   And at my laste waytinge upon your Majestie I was so bould to
declare my mynd and conscyence to the same, and desired your
Highnes, rather then you should constraine me to leave the
Masse, to take my life, whereunto your Majestie made me a very
gentle answere.
   And nowe I beseche your Highnes to give me leave to write
what I thinke towching your Majesties Letteres. In deed they be
signed with your owne hand, and neverthelesse in my oppinione
not your Majesties in effecte, because it is well knowne (as
heretofore I have declared in the presence of your Highnes) that
althoughe, Our Lorde be praysed, your Majestie hath farre more
knowledge and greater guiftes then otheres of your yeares, yett
it is not possyble that your Highnes can at theis yeares be a
judge in matters of Religeon.
<P 178>
And therefore I take it that the matter in your Letter procedeth
from such as do wish those thinges to take place, which be moste
agreeable to themselves; by whose doinges (your Majestie not
offended) I intend not to rule my Conscyence.
   And thus, without molestynge your Highnes any further, I
humblye beseeche the same ever, for Gods sake, to beare with me
as you have done, and not to thinke that by my doinges or
ensample any inconvenyence might growe to your Majestie or your
Realme; for I use it not after any such soarte; puttyng no
doubte but in tyme to come, whether I live or die, your Majestie
shall perceave myne intente is grownded upon a true love
towardes you, whose royall estate I beseech Almightie God longe
to contynewe, which is and shalbe my daylie prayer, accordinge
to my dutye.
   And after pardon craved of your Majestie for thes rude and
boulde Letteres, yf neither at my humble suite, nor for regard
of the promisse made to the Emperor, your Highnes will suffer
and beare with me, as you have done, tyll your Majestie may be a
Judge herein yourselfe, and right understand their proceedinges,
(of which your goodness yet I dispaire not,) otherwise, rather
then to offend God and my conscyence I offer my bodye at your
will, and death shall be more welcome than lyfe with a
trowbeled conssyence.
<P 179>
   Moste humbly beseching your Majestie to pardon my slowenes in
answeringe your Letteres, for my owlde deseasse would not suffer
me to write any soner. And thus I praye Almightie God to keepe
your Majestie in alle vertue and honor, with good health and
longe lyfe to his pleasure. From my poore howse at Copped Hall
the xix of Auguste.
   Your Majestie's moste humble sistere Mary.

<Q OR2 1553 JGREY>
<A JANE GREY>
<G F>
<P 183>
[} [\LETTER CLXXVII. THE LADY JANE GRAY, AS QUEEN, TO THE
MARQUIS OF NORTHAMPTON, LIEUTENANT OF THE COUNTY OF SURREY.\] }]
   Jane the quene.
   Right trustie and right welbeloved Cousen, we grete you well,
advertising the same that where yt
<P 184>
hath pleased Almighty God to call to his mercie out of this lief
our derest Cousen the King your late Sovereigne Lorde, by reason
wherof ande suche Ordenances as the said late King did
establishe in his lief tyme for the securitie and welthe of this
Realme, we are entrerid into our rightfull possession of this
Kingdome, as by the last Will of our said derest Cousen, our
late progenitor, and other severall instruments to that effect
signed with his own hande and sealed with the grete Seale of
this Realme in his own presence, wherunto the Nobles of this
realme for the most parte and all our Counsaill and Judges, with
the Mayor and Aldermen of our Cytie of London, and dyvers other
grave personages of this our Realme of England, have also
subscribed there names, as by the same Will and Instrument it
maye more evidently and plainly apere; We therfore doo You to
understand, that by th'ordenance and sufferaunce of the hevenly
Lord and King, and by th'assent and consent of our said Nobles
and Counsellors, and others before specifyed, We doo this daye
make our enterye into our Towre of London as rightfull Quene of
this realme; and have accordingly sett furthe our proclamacions
to all our loving subjects gyvenge them therby to understande
their duties and allegeaunce which they now of right owe unto us
as more amplie by the same you shall briefly perceyve and
understand; nothing doubting, right trustie and right welbeloued
cosen, but that you will
<P 185>
indever yourself in all things to the uttermost of your powre,
not only to defend our just title, but also assist us in our
rightfull possession of this kingdome, and to disturbe, repell,
and resist the fayned and untrue clayme of the Lady Mary basterd
daughter to our grete uncle Henry the Eight of famous memory;
wherein as you shall doo that which to youre honor, truthe, and
dutie aperteyneth, so shall we remembre the same unto you and
yours accordingly. And our further pleasure is that you shall
contynue, doo, and execute every thinge and things as our
Lieutenant within all places, according to the tenor of the
Commission addressed unto you from our late Cousen King Edward
the vj=th= in such and like sorte as if the same hadd byn, as we
mynde shortely it shal be, renued, and by us confirmed under our
grete Seale unto you. Yeven under our Signet at our Tower of
London the xj=th= of July, the furst yere of our Reign.
   To our right trusty and right welbeloved Cousyn and
Counsaillor the Marquiss of Northampton our Lieutenant generall
of our County of Surrey and to our trusty and welbeloved the
Deputes of that Lieutenancy; and the Sheriff, the chief Justices
of Peace and the worshipfull of that Shire.

<Q OR2 1553 JGREY>
<A JANE GREY>
<G F>
<P 186>
[} [\LETTER CLXXVIII. SECOND LETTER FROM THE LADY JANE AS QUEEN
TO THE LIEUTENANCY OF SURREY.\] }] 
   Jane the Quene. By the Quene.
   Trustie and wilbiloved we grete you well. Albeit that our
estate in this imperiall Crowne wherof we be actually and really
possessed, as partely may appere by our Proclamacion wherin our
tytle is published, is not ne can be in any wise doubtfull to
all suche our good faithfull subjects as, setting blynd
affection apart, do with reason and wysdom consider the very
foundacion and grounde of our tytle, with the grete commodities
therby coming thorough Gods providence to the preservacion of
our Comon Weale and polycie; yet for that we undrestande the
Ladye Marye dothe not cease by Lettres in hir name, provoked
therto by hir adherents, enemyes of this realme, to publishe and
notiefie sklanderously to dyverse of our subjects matter
derogatorye to our title an dignitie royall, withe the slandre
of certen of our Nobilitie and Counsell, We have thought mete to
admonishe and exhorte You, as our true and faithfull subjects,
to remayne fast in your obeysaunce and duetie to the imperiall
Crowne of this Realme, whereof we have justely the possession;
and not to be removed any wise from your duetie by
<P 187>
sklanderous reports or lettres, dispersed abrode either by the
said Lady Marye, or by hir adherence; for truelye like as the
Nobilitie of our Realme, our Counsell, oure Prelats, oure
Judges, and lerned men, and others good wise men, godly and
naturall subjects, do remayne fast and surelye in their
Allegiance towards us, redy to adventure their lives, landes,
and goodes for our defence, so can a greate numbre of the same
Nobilitie, Counsailors, and Judges truely testifye to all the
worlde, with savetye of their conscience, howe carefully and
ernestly the late King of famous memorye our dere Cousen King
Edward the Sixt from tyme to tyme mentioned and provoked them
partelye by perswasion, partely commandements, to have suche
respecte to his succession if God shuld call him to his mercye
without issue, as might be the preservacion of the Crowne in the
hole undefyled English bloud; and therfore of his owne mere
motion, both by graunt of his Lettres patents, and by
declaration of his Will, established the succession as it is
declared by our Proclamacion. And for the testimonye herof to
the satisfaction of suche as shall conceyve any doubt herin, We
understand that certen of our Nobilitie have written at this
present, in some parte to admonishe You of your duties, and to
testifie their knowledge of the truethe of our tytle and right.
Wherfore we leave to procede further therin, being assured in
the goodnes of God that your harts shalbe confirmed to owe your
duetye to us your soveraigne Lady, who
<P 188>
meane to preserve this Crowne of England in the royall blound,
and out of the [\THIS SPACE IS LEFT IN THE ORIGINAL.\] of
straungers and papists, with the defence of all you our good
subjects, your lieves, lands, and goods, in our peace agaynst
the invasions and violence of all forein or inward enemies and
rebells. Yeven under our Signet at our Tower of London the
xvj=th= day of July, in the first yere of our reigne.
   To our Trustie and welbeloved the Shirieff, Justices of
Peace, and other Gentilmen of our Countie of Surrey, and to
every of them.

<Q OR2 1564 HBERKELEY>
<A HENRY LORD BERKELEY>
<G M>
<P 196>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXII. HENRY LORD BERKELEY TO THE EARL OF
SUSSEX.\] }]
   Right honorable and my very good Lorde, whereas I am informed
by suche as of late are come owte of
<P 197>
Irelande that my Ladye Woormonde my sister is not so well used
by my Lorde her husbande as I would wishe her to be: and nature
movinge me to learne further of the truthe herein, I am so bolde
at this presente (hearinge of your Lordshipps late arrivall owt
of those partes) to desire your Lordship that yt maye please you
by your Lettres to signifye unto me whether you understande
there be anye suche mislikinge betwene them or not, and the
causes thereof, to the ende I maye travell therein accordinglie.
Trustinge also that yf she be not well dealte withall and used
as she ought to be, that then your Lordshippe will make reaporte
of the same to suche of the Councell as maye healpe to redresse
the matter, and my suite to be made for her the better
furthered. And in so doinge I must neades acknowledge myselfe
bothe very moche beholden unto your good Lordshippe, and She
also, for her parte, moste bounden contynuallye to pray to the
Almightie for the preservation of your Lordship with the
encreace of muche honoure. From my Castell of Berkeley, the
xxvj=th=. of Maye, 1564.
   Your Lordshipps assured
   Henry Berkeley.
   To the Right honorable and my very good Lorde the Earle of
Sussex, yeve these.

<Q OR2 1565 TRANDOLPH>
<A THOMAS RANDOLPH>
<G M>
<P 198>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXIII. THOMAS RANDOLPH TO SIR WILLIAM CECILL.\]
}]
   Your H. desyerethe from tyme to tyme to here of our doyngs
here, and, as the worlde framethe amongeste us, presentlye I
perceave that I shall lacke no matter to wryte of. Yester daye,
beinge Sondaye, the Banes of Matrimonie were askede in S=t=.
Giles Churche betwene thys Quene and the Lord Darlye in that
sorte as I sente your H. a byllet in wrytinge, saving that She
was fyrste named. After dyner, with all the solemnities
requisite, he was created Duke of 
<P 199>
Albanie, so that upon Sondaye nexte withowte all dowte the
mariage goethe forwarde, but yet uncertayne whether yt shalbe in
the Churche whear the Banes were asked, in the Abbie Churche, or
in her owne Chappell.
   Her force remaynethe contynnuallye with herr, and
proclamation made thys daye that no man upon payne of deathe
shall departe owte of the towne for x. dayes.
   The daye of Lawe agaynste the iiij Bourgois men of thys towne
is lyke to holde, for anye thynge that she cane be perswaded to
the contrarie. Yf so be that theie do compere, the protestants
have bounde them selves to assyste them with all the force that
theie are hable to mayke. The daye is upon Thurseday nexte. Thys
Counsell is nowe augmented by one copple mo then were before of
worthye Counsellors, that upon Saterdaye with no smale force
came to thys towne, the Earle Athall and L. Ruthen. So are ther
nowe present the L. Chauncelor, L. Athall, L. Ersken, L. Ruthen,
and the Secretarie; some other are admitted to stonde by, of the
noble men that are here present. My Lord of Murraye hathe
playnelye refused to come amonge their hands whome he hathe so
good occasion to suspecte, and therfore yt was yesterdaye in
consultation whether yt were beste to have hym proclamed rebell
thys daye or not; whear unto some among the Lords dyscented. I
knowe not yet what
<P 200>
will become of yt, nor who their were that dyscented.
   I here saye that the Quene will thys daye despache a man, I
know not yet whome, towards the Quene's Ma=tie=, I thynke some
Frenche man, bycause of the Emb. from whome she hathe all her
intelligens. Ther is one Lassells that dwellethe bysyds Toplyf,
a cunnynge dealer betwene thys Countrye and that. Maye yt please
her Ma=tie= that I may knowe her pleasure for suche Englisshemen
as are here, or others that come. Moste humblye I tayke my
leave. At Edenbourge the xxiiij=th=. of Julye, 1565.
   Yo=r= H. allwayes at commaund
   Tho. Randolphe.
To the right honorable S=r=. William Scicill knight principall
Secretorie to the Q. Ma=tie=.

<Q OR2 1566 TRANDOLPH>
<A THOMAS RANDOLPH>
<G M>
<P 205>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXV. THOMAS RANDOLPH TO SIR WILLIAM CECIL.\] }]
   Maye yt please yo=r= H. I have receaved the Quene's M=ts=.
lettre of the seconde of this instant, and therby understonde
her Mat=s=. mynde touchynge the Commissioners appoynted by this
Quene according to her Mat=s=. will. I have spoken agayne with
this Quene that some other noble man of lyke qualitie myghte be
appoynted in my Lord Bothewell place, whearunto her Grace hathe
not yet accorded, but hathe promised to conferr with her
Counsell ther in, and to gyve me a resolute answer therof within
iij. or iiij. dayes, w=ch= tyme I do attende, and in the meane
season wolde not that yo=r= H. sholde thynke longe for my
lettres; for with more expedition I cane not bringe these
matters to that passe that is to be desyered. I thoughte good
also t'advertyse yo=r= H. that this daye Roberte Melvin is
despached from hens towards the Quene's Ma=tie= from the Quene.
His cheif Commission is to see what the Quene's Ma=tie= will do
for this Quene towards the succession in favour of my Lord of
Murraye and his complices. He muste also sue for my Ladie Lenox
deliverie, and other wyse see what freindshipe he cane mayke
amonge such as are well wyllinge towards her
<P 206>
and howsbonde, that none be preferred to them in their pretended
righte. The best couller that he cane use is to be suter for the
Lord, and in the meane season maye deale with other as he cane
fynde occasion. Yt is thought that anye thynge that this Quene
cane desyer wilbe the easlyer accordyd for the greate number of
her favorers in the Quenes Ma=ts= reaulme. I shall not neade nor
wyll not be so bolde as t'advise you to stonde harde to yo=r=
centere, but I assure you I see this parte of the circumference
shrewedlye inclined, and to beare a greate swaye to yo=r= hurte,
yf yt be not looked unto. Yt hathe byne openlye saide by this
Quene that she wyll have the Masse free for all men that wyll
here yt. Her howsbonde, his father, Lord Athall, and other, nowe
daylye resorte to yt. The Protestants in suche feare and dowte
of them selves that theie knowe not what shall become of them.
The wyseste so myche meslyke this state and goverment, that
theie desyer nothynge more then the retorne of the Lords, ether
to be receaved in their owne rowmes or ons agayne to put all in
hazarde.
   Yesterdaye the Lord Darlye receaved the Order. The Emb. bothe
dyned and supped with hym. This daye he dynethe with the Quene;
tomorrowe with the Counsell; upon Wensedaye in the Castle; and
Thursedaye departethe. The Solemnitie was greate, the moste
parte of the nobilitie present. Ther went with hym to the masse,
his father, Earles Athall and
<P 207>
Cassels, and Lord Seton. Thus myche I thought good to wryte unto
Your H. attendinge suche answer as I shall gette touchynge the
Commissioners. Moste humblye I tayke my leave. At Edenb. the
x=th=. of Februarie 1565.
   Yo=r= h. bounden at commande
   Tho. Randolphe.
   To the righte honorable S=r=. William Cecill Knighte
Principall Secretarie to the Quenes Ma=tie=.

<Q OR2 1566 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 229>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXIX. QUEEN ELIZABETH TO THE LADY HOBY.\] }] 
   Madam
   Although we heare that since the death of your husband, our
late Ambassador, S=r= Thomas Hoby, you have received, in France,
great and comfortable courtesyes from the French King, the Queen
Mother, the Queen of Navarre and sundry others, yet we made
accompt that all these layd together cannot so satisfye you as
some testimony and sparke of our favour, with the application of
the late service of your Husband, and of your own demeanour
there: wherefore though you shall receive it somewhat lately in
time, yet we assure you the same proceedeth only of the late
knowledge of your return. And therefore we let you know that the
service of your Husband was to us so acceptable, as next
yourself and your children we have not
<P 230>
the meanest loss of so able a Servant in that calling. And yet
since it hath so pleased God to call him in the entry of this
our Service, we take it in the better part, seeing it hath
appeared to be Gods pleasure to call him away, so favourably to
the service of him, especially in the constancy of his duty
towards God, wherein, we hear say, he dyed very commendably.
   And for your self, we cannot but let you know that we hear
out of France such singular good reports of your duty well
accomplished towards your husband, both living and dead, with
other your sober, wise, and discreet behaviour in that Court and
Country, that we think it a part of great contentation to us,
and commendation of our Country, that such a Gentlewoman hath
given so manifest a testimony of virtue in such hard times of
adversity. And therefore though we thought very well of you
before, yet shall we hereafter make a more assured account of
your virtues and gifts, and wherein soever we may conveniantly
do you pleasure, you may be thereof assured. And so we would
have you to rest yourself in quietness, with a firm opinion of
our especiall favour towards you. Given under our Signet at our
City of Oxford the .. of September 1566: the eight year of our
Reign.
   Your loving Friend Elizabeth, R.

<Q OR2 1569 BRANDOLPH>
<A BERNARD RANDOLPH>
<G M>
<P 254>
[} [\LETTER CXCVII. BERNARD RANDOLPH COMMON SERJEANT OF LONDON,
TO SIR WILLIAM CECIL.\] }] 
   Righte honorable, after my humble duetie to your Honor
remembred, pleasethe the same to be advertised
<P 255>
that I (allthough most unworthie) being by dyvysion lymytted
under your honor and M=r=. Deane to the Citie of Westminster and
lyberties of the same, aswell for thexamynacion of rogues and
sturdye vagabondes and masterlesse men, as also for to punyshe
other enormyties and mysdemeanors theare; to the whiche
precincte above other in the Shire, in th'absence of your honor
(and the said M=r=. Deane) I thinck myself more bounden to have
a vigillant eye then if the same M=r=. Deane weare at home, or
your honor somewhat nearer. And repayring thither this daye (as
comonlie I doo but ones everye fortenight yf I have no especial
cause), but this is the thirde tyme of my goinge thither, to
examyn a lewde persone whoe hathe stolen diverse parcells of
brass and copper that did adorne the Tombe of the late Kinge of
famouse memorie Henrie the Seventhe and Queene Elizabeth his
wife. And at my nowe comynge thither M=r=. Staunton and others
of th'inhabitants of the said Cytie, gave me to understande
thatt there was a great disorder in or near Long Acre, by reason
of certain Games that were proclaymed there to be exercised,
wheare indede theare was none used but one onlie Game, called
Riflinge, by which they saide diverse persons weare spoyled and
utterlie undon. Wheruppon I comaunded M=r=. Colbrande the highe
Constable of the saide Cytie and Lyberties (taking with hym
suche nomber of petit constables and others
<P 256>
as to his discression sholde seme mete, and sendinge before
worde to the constable of S=t=. Gyles in the fieldes to mete hym
theare) to goe thither, and not onlie to apprehende all persones
that sholde be founde theare usinge the same game, but also them
that kepte the same games. And I my self went also thither for
the quieter apprehendinge of them, for I was informed by the
said M=r=. Staunton that theare was a very greate nomber, and
the nomber I thinck was muche the greater by reasone of the
concourse of people thither to se one lyinge theare that was
slayne theare this mornyng. Wheruppon the Keper of the same
Games was broughte before me, but none of them that played
theare: and yet one of my owne Servants, whom I sent pryvylie
thither for that purpose, did see that game of Ryflinge in use
theare at that tyme. But I thincke pryvie warnynge was gyven
when I was perceyved to bende my selfe that waye. Maye it please
your Honor, I commytted the Keper of the same Game to warde,
meanynge nevertheles uppon sute to bayle hym untill the general
Sessions. And forasmuche as he is one of the Quene's Majestie's
Servants, and hathe a Lycence for laufull Games signed by
th'andes of the right honorables the Lorde Stewarde, the Lorde
of Arrundell, and the Lorde of Leicester (the copye wherof I
have taken and intende to kepe the same), and he was in tymes
past servant to the saide Lorde of Arrundell. And for that
before
<P 257>
this tyme I have had some stoute and sharpe wordes when I have
don even favorable justice to honorable mens servants, and
doubting what synister complainte may be now againste me to any
of honorable personages abovenamed, I have thought good to make
your Honor pryvie of this my doinge, humblie praying your good
Honor's ayde if I shall have nede of the same. And beinge verie
sorie to trouble your Honor with this my longe rude Lettre, I
comytt the same to the tuyssion of the Allmightie whoe ever
preserve you in helthe and welthe longe to contynue, with
increase of much honor. Written the fourth of this September
1569.
   Your Honor's to commande to my little power
   Bernard Randolph,
Commen Serjiant of London.
   To the right honorable Sir William Cecyll Knight, principall
Secretarie to the Quene's Majestie be theis gyven withe good
spede.

<Q OR2 1572 FRUSSELL>
<A FRANCIS RUSSELL>
<G M>
<P 266>
[} [\LETTER CCIII. THE EARL OF BEDFORD TO LORD TREASURER
BURGHLEY.\] }]
   After my hartie comendacions to yo=r= good Lordshippe, here
enclosed I sende you a Lettre of M=r= Asshetones
<P 267>
which shuld have bene delyvered some dayes sythens. [^A PASSAGE
OMITTED^]
   I am now going to prepare for her Ma=ties= coming to Woborne,
which shalbe done in the best and most hartiest maner that I
can. I trust yo=r= L. will have in remembraunce to provide and
helpe that her Ma=ts=. tarieng be not above two nights and a
daye; for, for so long tyme do I prepare. I pray god the Rowmes
and Lodgings there may be to her Ma=ts=. contentacion for the
tyme. If I could make them better upon suche a sodeyn, then wold
I, be assured. They should be better then they be. So w=t= my
hartie thanks to yo=r= good L. remayning alwayes as I have just
cause yo=rs=, do so committ you to Gods keping. From Russell
House this xvj=th=. of July 1572.
   Yo=r= L. right assured
   F. Bedford.
To my verie good Lord the Lord Burghley, Highe Treasurer of
England.

<Q OR2 1582 W1FLEETWOOD>
<A WILLIAM FLEETWOOD 1>
<G M>
<P 283>
[} [\LETTER CCXII. WILLIAM FLEETWOOD RECORDER OF LONDON, TO LORD
BURGHLEY.\] }] 
   My singuler good Lord, uppon Thursday at even, her Majestie
in her Cooche, near Islyngton, taking of
<P 284>
the aier, her Highnes was environed with a nosmber of Rooges.
One M=r= Stone a footeman cam in all hast to my Lord Maior, and
after to me, and told us of the same. I dyd the same night send
warants owt into the seyd quarters and in to Westminster and the
Duchie: and in the mornyng I went a brood my selff, and I tooke
that daye lxxiiij roogs, whereof some were blynd and yet great
usurers, and very riche: and the same daye towards night I sent
for M=r=. Harrys and M=r=. Smithe and the governors of Bridwell,
and tooke all the names of the roogs; and sent theym frome the
Sessions Hall unto Bridwell where they remayned that night. Upon
Twelff daye in the forenoone, the Master of the Rolls, my selff,
and others receyved a charge before my Lords of the Counsell as
towching roogs and masterles men, and to have a pryvie searche.
The same daye at after dyner (for I dyned at the Rolls) I mett
the governors of Bridwell, and so that after nowne we examined
all the seyd roogs and gave theym substanciall payment. And the
strongest we bestowed in the mylne and the lighters. The rest
wee desmyssed with a promise of a dooble paye if we mett with
theym agayne. Upon Sounday being (\crastino\) of the Twelfth
daye, I dyned with M=r= Deane of Westminster, where I conferred
with hym towching Westminster and the Duchie, and then I tooke
order for Southwarke, Lambeth, and Newyngton, from whence I
receyved a shooll of xl. rooggs, men and women, and
<P 285>
above. I bestowed theym in Bridwell. I dyd the same after nowne
peruse Pooles, where I tooke abowt xx=ti= cloked roogs that
there use to kepe standing. I placed theym also in Bridwell. The
next mornyng, being Mounday, the M=r=: of the Roolls and the
rest tooke order with the Constables for a privie searche
ageynst Thursdaye at night, and to have the offendors browght to
the Sessions Hall upon Frydaye in the mornyng where wee the
Justices shold mete. And agaynst the same tyme my Lo. Maior and
I dyd the lyke in London and Sowthworke. The same afternowne the
Masters of Bridwell and I mett, and, after every man being
examined, eche one receyved his payment according to his
deserts; at whiche tyme the strongest were put to worke and the
other dismissed into theire Countries. The same daye the M=r=.
of the Savoye was with us and sayd he was sworne to lodge "
(\claudicantes, egrotantes, et peregrinantes\) ;" and the next
mornyng I sent the Constables of the Duchie to the Hospitall and
they browght unto me at Bridewell vj. tall fellowes that were
draymen unto bruers and were neither " (\claudicantes,
egrotantes\) , nor (\peregrinantes\) ." The Constables if they
might have had theyre owen wills wold have browght as many moo.
The Master dyd wryte a very curtese letter unto us to produce
theym: and although he wrott charitably unto us, yet were they
all sowndly payed, and sent home to thare
<P 286>
masters. All Tewsday, Weddensdaye, and Thursdaye there cam in
nosmbers of roogs; they were rewarded all according to theire
deserts. Upon Frydaye mornyng, at the Justice Hall, there were
browght in above a C. lewed people taken in the privie searche.
The M=rs=. of Bridwell receyved theym, and immediatly gave theym
punishment. This Satterday, after Causes of Consciens herd by my
Lord Maior and me, I dined and went to Polls and in other places
as well within the libertes as els where, and I founde not one
rooge stirryng. Emongest all these thyngs I dyd note, that we
had not of London, Westm. nor Sowthwarke, nor yet Midd. nor
Surr. above twelve, and those we have taken order for. The
resedew for the most were of Wales, Salop, Cestr. Somerset,
Barks, Oxforde, and Essex; and that fewe or none of thaym had
ben abowt London above iij. or iiij. mownthes. I dyd note also
that we mett not agayne w=th= any in all our searches that had
receyved punishment. The chieff nurserie of all these evell
people is the Savoye, and the brick kilnes nere Islyngton. As
for the brick kylnes, we will take suche order that they shall
be reformed. And I trust by yo=r= good Lordship's help the
Savoye shall be amended; for suerlie, as by experiens I fynd it,
the same place, as it is used, is not converted to a good use or
purpose. And this shall suffice for Roogs.
   Upon Weddensdaye last a Frenche merchaunt, in a bagge sealed,
delivered to a cariers wiff of Norwich
<P 287>
xl=li= to be caried to Norwich. She secretlie conveyed the money
to a howse a good way off frome the Inne, and within half a
quarter of an houre the Frenche merchaunt cam agayne to se his
money packed up. But the woman denyed that ever she received any
one penny with such horrible protestacions as I never herd of
before. M=r=. Secretarie Walsingham wrote me his Letters for the
ayde of the Frenche man, and after great searche made, the money
was founde and restored. She not knowing of the same, I examined
her in my studie privatlie, but by no meanes she wold not
confesse the same, but dyd bequeth her selff to the Devell, both
bodie and sowle, if she had the money or ever sawe it. And this
was her craft that she then had not the money, and in dead she
sayth the trowth, for it was eyther at her frynds where she left
it, or els delyvered. And then I perceyving her fewke, I asked
her whether the Frenche merchant dyd not bring her a bagge
sealed full of metall that was weightie, were it either platts,
coyne, cownters, or suche lyke: then, quoth she, I will aunswer
no further. And then I used my Lo. Maiors advise, and bestowed
her in Bridwell, where the Masters and I sawe her punished; and,
being well whipped, she sayd that the Devell stood at her elbowe
in my studie, and willed her to denye it. But so soon as she was
upon the Crosse to be punished he gave her over. And thus my
singuler good Lo. I end this tragical part of this wicked woman.
<P 288>
   This mornyng the Deputie of Holborne and two of the Wardmot
Enquest browght me this examination. I send for the partie. He
was browght before my Lord Maior and me. And we have commanded
hym to warde expecting yo=r= good Lo. advise as towchinge his
offens.
   Thus most humbly I send unto yo=r= good Lo. this last weeks
Diarye, ceasing at this tyme to troble yo=r= honer any further.
At Bacon howse this 14 of Ja. 1581.
   Your good Lo. most bounden W. Fletewoode.
To the right honorable and my singuler good L. My Lo. High
Treaso=r= of England.

<Q OR2 1583 W1FLEETWOOD>
<A WILLIAM FLEETWOOD 1>
<G M>
<P 290>
[} [\LETTER CCXIV. M=R= RECORDER FLEETWOOD TO LORD BURGHLEY.\]
}] 
   Right honorable
   Sithens your Lo. last being here in London there have ben
twoo great Feasts, the one at the Grosers-hall, the other at the
Haberdashers-hall. At the Haberdashers feast was my Lord Maior,
and divers of his brethern, with myselff, where my Lo. Maior
after the second course come inne dyd take the great standing
Cupp of the gift of Sir William Garrett, being full of Ypocraze,
(and silence being commaunded throwgh all the Tables) all men
being bare-headed, my Lo, before all men dyd use these words
with a convenyent lowd voyce "M=r=. Recorder of London and yow
my good bretherne the Aldermen, beare witnes that I do drynke
unto M=r=. Alderman Massam as Shereff of London and Midd. frome
Mighelmas next comming, for one holl yere; and I do beseche God
to graunt hym as quiett and peaceable a yere with as good and
gratious favor of her Maiestie as I my selff and my brethern the
Shereffs now being have hytherto had, and as I trust shall
have." This spoken, all men desired the same. The Sword-bearer
in hast went to the Grosers
<P 291>
ffeast, where M=r=. Ald=n=. Massam was at dyner; and there dyd
openlie declare the words that my Lo. Maior had used: whereunto
(silens made and all being hushe) the Alderman aunswered verie
modestlie in this sort, "First I thanke God who through his
great goodness haith called me frome a verie poore and meane
degree unto this worshipfull estate. Secondlie I thanke her
Majestie for her gratious goodnes in allowing unto us these
great and ample fraunchises. Thirdlie I thank my Lo. Maior for
having so honorable an opinion of this My Companie of Grocers as
to make choise of me being a poore member of the same." And this
said, bothe he and all the Companie pledged My Lord and gave hym
thanks.
   M. Nowell of the Court haith lately been here in London. He
caused his man to geve a blowe unto a carrman. His man haithe
stricken the carrman with the pumell of his sword and therwith
haith broken his skelle and killed hym. M=r=. Nowell and his man
are lyke to be indicated; whereof I am sure to be muche trobled,
what with lettres and his frynds, and what by other meanes as in
the verie like case heretofore I have byn even with the same
man. Here are sunderie yonge gentilmen that use the Court that
most commonly terme theymselffs (^gyntylmen^) . When any of
these have done any thinge amisse and are compleyned of, or
arrested for debt, they then runne unto me, and no other excuse
or aunswere can they make but saye
<P 292>
" (^I am a Jyntylman, and being a Jyntylman I am not thus to be
used at a slave and a colions handes.^) " I know not what other
parlee M=r=. Nowell can pled; but this I say, the fact is fowle.
God send hym good deliverans. I thinke in my conscience that he
makethe no reckenyng of the matter.
   Hit was my chaunse to examine a matter in the Court holden at
Bridwell. I have ben complayned of to the Counsel bord. I was
sent for. M=r=. Secretary received my Aunswer, and told the
compleynaunts that they had deserved to be hanged And this is
the Case. Abraham of Abraham a gentilman of an hundred pound
land in com. Lanc. put his dawghter and heire unto my lady
Gerrerd of the Brenne. Sir Thomas and my lady being here in
London, one Dwelles, a fenser nere Cicell howse, and his wiff,
by indirect meanes, being of kyn to the girle, dyd invite all my
Lady's children and gentilwomen unto a breakfast. They cam
thether, and at theire commyng the yowthes and servingmen were
caried up to the ffens skolle. My Ladys dowghters and
gentilwomen must nedes play at the cardes, will they nill they.
The girle Abraham, by the wiff of the howse, was conveyghed in
to a chamber, and shut the dowre after her and there left her.
The Girl found in the Chamber iiij. or v. tall men. She knew
theym not. And ymediatlie the girle fell into a great ffeare
seyng them to compasse her about. Then began an old priest to
read upon a
<P 293>
booke, his words she understood not, saving these words "I Henry
take the Suzane to my wedded wiff" &c. This done they charged
the wenche never to discover this to any body lyving: and so
sent her downe to her fellowes. And dyner being done the wenche
told to her fellowes very lamentably what had ben donne; and
they over to S=r=. Tho. and my La. And upon complaynt I sent for
the ffensers wiff who wold confesse nothyng. I went with her my
self to Bridwell, where there was a full Court, and thether cam
Sir Thomas with the wenche, and there we bolted owt the wholl
matter and dyd no more. The ffensers wyff is retorned to the
Cownter. The wenche is with my La. Gerrerd. She was never in
Bridwell, as the ffenser and one Poollwhele dyd avouche to some
of my Lords. The wenche was there to accuse the fensers wiff in
open Court. My Lo. this being the fact, and the trew case
thereof, I fynd the same to be ffellonie by A=o=. 3. st. 7. ca.
2. And therefore me thinketh suche companyons as this fenser and
his wiff are, owght not to be allowed to deface suche poore men
as I am, in suche order, before the Lords. Thus most humbly I
take my leave of yo=r= good Lo. this 18 of Julie 1583.
   Yo=r= good Lo. most bounden
   W. Fletewoode.
"To the right honorable and my singuler good Lord Treasourer of
England."

<Q OR2 1585 W1FLEETWOOD>
<A WILLIAM FLEETWOOD 1>
<G M>
<P 295>
[} [\LETTER CCXVI. M=R=. RECORDER FLEETWOOD TO LORD TREASURER
BURGHLEY.\] }] 
<P 296>
   Right honorable and my verie good Lord, uppon Thursdaye
laste, beinge the crastinn of Trinitie Terme, we kepte a
Sessions of Inquyrie in London in the forenone, and in the
afternone we kepte the lyke att Fynsburie for Middlesex, in
which two severall Sessionses all such as were to be arrayegned
for felonye at the Gaole deliverye were indyted. Uppon Frydaie
last we sate at the Justice hall att Newgate from vij in the
morninge untill vij att night, where were condempned
<P 297>
certen horstealers, cutpurses, and such lyke, to the nusmber of
x., whereof ix. were executed, and the tenthe stayed by a meanes
from the Courte. These were executed uppon Saterdaye in the
morninge. There was a Showmaker also condempned for wyllfull
murder commytted in the Blacke ffryers, who was executed uppon
Mondaie in the morninge. The same daye my Lord Maior beinge
absent abowte the goods of the Spannyards, and also all my Lords
the Justices of the Benches beinge also awaye, we fewe that were
there did spend the same daie abowte the searchinge out of
sundrye that were receptors of ffelons, where we fownd a greate
manye aswell in London, Westminster, Sowthwarke, as in all other
places abowte the same. Amongest our travells this one matter
tumbled owt by the waye, that one Wotton a gentilman borne, and
sometyme a marchauntt man of good credyte, who fallinge by tyme
into decaye, kepte an Alehowse att Smarts keye neere
Byllingesgate, and after, for some mysdemeanor beinge put downe,
he reared upp a newe trade of lyffe, and in the same Howse he
procured all the Cuttpurses abowt this Cittie to repaire to his
said howse. There, was as schole howse sett upp to learne younge
boyes to cutt purses. There were hung up two devises, the one
was a pockett, the other was a purse. The pockett had in yt
certen cownters and was hunge abowte with hawkes bells, and over
the toppe did hannge a litle sacring bell; and he that could
take owt a cownter without any noyse, was allowed to
<P 298>
be (^a publique ffoyster^) : and he that could take a peece of
sylver owt of the purse without the noyse of any of the bells,
he was adjudged (^a judiciall Nypper^) . Nota that a ffoister is
a Pick-pockett, and a Nypper is termed a Pickepurse, or a
Cutpurse. And as concerninge this matter, I will sett downe noe
more in this place, but referr your Lordship to the paper herein
enclosed.
   Saterdaye and Sondaie beinge past, uppon Mondaie my Lord
Maior, my Lord Buckhurste, the M=r=. of the Rooles, my Lord
Anderson, M=r=. Sackford Master of the Requests, S=r=. Rowland
Hayward, my selffe, M=r=. Owen, and M=r=. Younge, with the
assystaunce of M=r=. Attorney and M=r=. Solicitor, did arraigne
one Awfeild, Webley, and Crabbe, for sparcinge abrood certen
lewed, sedicious, and traytorous bookes; Awfeild did most
trayterously maynteyne the booke, with longe tedious and
frivolous wordes and speaches. Webley did affirme as much as
Awfeild had uttered. They are both executed thorough Gods
goodnes and yo=r= Lordshipps good helpe, as M=r=. Younge told
me. There came a Letter to reprive Awfeild, yt was not well
digested of as many as knewe of yt, but after all was well
taken. When he was executed, his bodye was brought into S=t=.
Pulchers to be buryed, but the parishioners would not suffer a
Traytor's corpes to be layed in the earthe where theire parents,
wyeffs, chyldren, kynred, maisters, and old neighbors did rest:
and so his carcase was retourned to the buryall grounde neere
Tyborne, and there I leave yt. Crabbe surelye
<P 299>
did renownce the Pope, and my Lords and the rest of the Benche
moved M=r=. Attorney and M=r=. Solicitor to be a meane to her
Maiestie for him, and for that cause he was stayed. Trewelye my
Lord it is nothinge needfull to wrytte for the staye of any to
be repryved, for there is not any in our Commyssion of London or
Middlesex but we are desirous to save or staye any poore
wretche, yf by color of any lawe or reason we maye doe ytt. My
singler good Lord my Lord William of Wynchester was wonte to
saye, "when the Courte is furthest from London, then is there
the best justice done in all England." I once hard as great a
parsonage in office and authoritye as ever He was, and yett
lyvinge, saye the same wordes. Yt is growen for a trade nowe in
the Courte to make meanes for repryves, twentie pownd for a
reprive is nothinge, although it be but for bare tenn daies. I
see it will not be holpen onles one honored gentilman, who many
tymes is abused by wronge informacion (and suerlie uppon my
sowle, not uppon any evill meaninge) do staye his penn. I have
not one Letter for the staye of a theiffe from your Lordshippe.
Fearinge that I trouble your Lordship with my tedious Lettres I
end, this vij=th=. of Julie 1585.
   Your good Lordships moste humbly bownden
   W. Fletewoode.
<P 300>
   At the endinge of this Lettre I received an othere, the which
I will aunswere owt of hand.
   Upon Tewsdaie I satt in Jugement in the hustings, where M=r=.
Cure and his corporate bretherne the Sadlers recovered xl=li=.
land in a writ of right (\'lon le mise fint ioyne sur le mere
droit'\) against one Beale.
   Upon Weddensday wee satt in Southwark abowt the Goneres where
my cossen Holcroft accused and (\'de repetundis'\) &c.
   (^Archana.^)
   There was one that is called M=r=. Abarrowe that was at the
takynge of the Erle of Arundell, and had gotten into his hands
of his nere abowte ccc=li=. in gold. He was commanded to brynge
the same to the LL. of the Sterre Chamber. His man carried it
after hym even to the Sterre chamber doore and soddenly his man
sterted away and tooke a boote, past into Sowthwarke, devyded
the money, and there by my warrant was taken, and in effect all
the money was had agayne. M=r=. Abarrowe his Master was the
lothest man in England to have his man towched for this offence.
I caused hym to be indicted and arreigned. My lord Anderson
tooke it to be no fellonye because his master delyvered hym the
money. I sayd it was felonye by the common lawe, because the
custodie and bearing of the money in his masters presens was
adjuged to
<P 301>
be as if it had ben in his masters owen custodie. As if my
butler, my horse keper, my sheperd, or the yoman of my warderobe
do steale and imbesell any thinge in his charge this is felonye,
and even so is it of my purse bearer. And if it were not
felonye by the comen lawe then was it by the statute, if the
somme were above xl=s=. But I fearynge the matter might be
called before my Lords, beinge a thing so notoriusly knowen, I
caused the Jurie to fynd the speciall matter, and so it resteth.
I do lerne sithens that the ffelow had ben in tymes past servant
to M=r=. Smith the Clerk of the Pype, &c.
[^LIST OF NAMES OMITTED^]
<P 303>
   Memorand. That in Wotton's howse at Smarts Keye are wrytten
in a table divers Poysies, and among the rest one is this
   (^Si spie sporte, si non spie, tunc steale.^)
Another thus
   (^Si spie, si non spie, ffoyste, nyppe, lyfte, shave and
spare not.^)
   Note that (^ffoyste^) is to cutt a pockett, (^nyppe^) is to
cutt a purse, (^lyft^) is to robbe a shoppe or a gentilmans
chamber, (^shave^) is to ffylche a clooke, a sword, a sylver
sponne or such like, that is negligentlie looked unto. Nota,
that (^mylken ken^) is to commytt a roborie or burgularie in the
night in a dwelling howse, &c.
   To the Right honourable and my synguler good Lord the Lord
Highe Treasorer of England.

<Q OR2 1586 W1FLEETWOOD>
<A WILLIAM FLEETWOOD 1>
<G M>
<P 306>
[} [\LETTER CCXVIII. SERJEANT FLEETWOOD TO LORD BURGHLEY.\] }] 
   Right Honorable and my singuler good Lord, this present daye
from two of the clocke until syx, my Lo. Maior, with some of his
bretherne th'Aldermen and myselffe, dyd examyne certene
Apprentices for conspiringe an insurrection in this Cittie
agaynst the Frenche and Dutche, but speciallie against the
<P 307>
Frenche; a thinge as lyke unto yll Maye daie as could be devysed
in all manner of circumstaunces, (\mutatis mutandis\) , ther
wanted nothinge but execucion. We have taken fyve, all of an
age, yet all under xxj=tie=: fower of them Darbishier borne; the
fyrste borne in Norhamshier. We are searchinge and seekinge for
the principall Captayne; we hope we shall heare of him this
night, for he hath ben workinge all this daie in the Whyt hall
at Westminster, and at his cominge home we trust to have him. We
have this night sett a standinge watche armed, from nyne until
seven in the morninge, and doe meane to contynewe the same soe
longe as yt shalbe thought convenient unto your honor and the
resydewe of my Lords.
   M=r=. Alderman Woodcocke, who maryed the wydowe of M=r=.
Lanyson shalbe buried uppon Moundaye next. S=r= Rowland Hayward
is exstreame sicke and greatlie distressed (our Lord comfort
him). My Ladie his wieffe is likewise verie sicke.
   This night M=r=. Attorney Generall sent his man unto me to
sett my hand and seale unto a warrant to summon a Quest of
enquirie to appeare to morowe att Westminster Hall. The
Citizens, when they shall heare of yt, will lyke thereof verie
well, for they all crye owt that justice maye be done uppon
these Treators. The foresaid Apprentices, being of the Mysterie
of Plastorers, are commytted unto Newgate uppon the Quenes
Highnes and her Councells commaundement, where
<P 308>
they are lyke to remayne untill they be delivered by speciall
warrant. 
   Here is presentlie noe other thinge worthie of writinge.
Wherefore I beseech God to preserve first her Ma=tie=, and then
yo=r= Lordship, from all these Treators and such other wicked
people. From the Guylde hall this present Twesdaie the sixt of
September at seaven of the clocke in the eveninge 1586.
   Yo=r= Lo: most humble bownden
   W. Fletewoode.
   Att the sendinge away of my man this Weddensday mornynge all
the bells of London do ring for ioye, that, upon the 7 of this
monethe, beinge as this daie, A=o= 25 H. 8. her Grace was borne.
There wilbe this daie but specially great ffeastinge at supper.
I have ben bidden owt this night to supper in vj. or vij.
places.
   To the Right Honorable and my singuler good Lo. the Lo.
Treasorer of England, at the Courte.



<B HUTTON>

[^THE CORRESPONDENCE OF DR. MATTHEW HUTTON, ARCHBISHOP OF YORK.
WITH A SELECTION FROM THE LETTERS, ETC. OF SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON,
KNT., HIS SON; AND MATTHEW HUTTON, ESQ., HIS GRANDSON. ED. BY
RAINE, JAMES. THE PUBLICATIONS OF THE SURTEES SOCIETY 17.
1843.^]

<Q HUT 1566 EGRINDALL>
<A EDMUND GRINDALL>
<G M>
<P 54>
[} [\LETTER II.\] DR. E. GRINDALL, BISHOP OF LONDON, TO DR.
HUTTON.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\15 Sep. 1566.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) Wheras I appoynted you to preache att
Paules Crosse the 3 off November nexte: becawse the Parlament
dothe holde, and therfore it is lyke that the Bisshops shall
occupie the rowme those Sundays in the myddes off the tearme, I
muste entreate you to prevente your daye, and to preach Dominica
17=a=, which is the 6 off October nexte. The tyme, thowghe it
may be somewhatt shorte, is longe enoughe for you; and I am
destitute. It is the firste Sundaye off the Parlament, and
therfore I labour to have one learned for thatt daye. I praye
you fayle nott, and certiffie me w=th= conveniente spede agayne.
Fare ye well. Frome Fulham, 15 Septemb. 1566.
   Yo=r= in Christe,
   Edm. London.
   To my lovinge frende, M=r=. Doctor Hutton, M=r=. off
Pembrooke Halle in Cambrige.

<Q HUT 1575 KHASTINGS>
<A LADY HUNTINGDON>
<G F>
<P 56>
[} [\LETTER IV.\] LADY HUNTINGDON TO MR. DEANE OF YORKE.}] [^TO
DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\Julie 21, 1575.\]
   After my verye hartie commendacions. Forasmuch as a kinsman
of my lorde and a cosen of myne doe intend, by the grace of God,
to marrye together vppon Sondaye nexte, I am therefore bould to
desyre you, that you would take the paynes to be here againste
that tyme, and to bestowe a shorte sermon vppon vs, suche as for
the short warning you have maye suffise for that audience. The
which ended, or before, att your discretion, I muste further
intreate you to helpe to sollempnize that mariage. And even soe,
being bould to truble you, I doe bidd you hartelye fare well.
Att York, this xxj=th= of Julye, 1575.
   Your frend in the Lord,
   K. Huntingdon.
   Good Mr. Deane, refuse not to take this paines in being heare
against Sondaie; which I shall thinke my sealfe beholdine to you
for the same, and will be redie to pleasure you in any thing I
maie.
   To my very loving frend, M=r= Deane of York.

<Q HUT 1577 EGRINDALL>
<A EDMUND GRINDALL>
<G M>
<P 56>
[} [\LETTER V.\] EDMUND GRINDALL, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, TO
DR. MATTHEW HUTTON, DEAN OF YORK.}] 
[\25 April, 1577.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I hartely thanke ye for your favour
extendett towards this bringer W. Allen. I perswade my selfe
that ye shewed him favour for my sake in the office bestowed
<P 57>
vpon him, and thatt ye had remembrance off my sute made vnto ye
for him heretofore, and therefore I thanke ye accordynglye. Iff
I had hadde anie speciall creditte when Durham and Carl. were
bestowed, some hadde not spedde so well: but blame your selfe
and Sir Tho: Garg: ye 2 comendett him, to be rydde off him: and
nowe Simon is as goodd as Peter. This geare wolde make a man
synge (\"Mei autem pene` moti sunt pedes," &c.\)
   Off myne owne present state I thynke ye can nott be ignorant:
it maye be, that evell reports flye abroade agaynste me; my
meanynge is goode. The ende is in Goddes handes, to whose grace
I hartely commende you; with my salutations to M=r=. Palmer, and
the reste off myne olde Chapleyns Prebendaries off your chirche.
Lambethe, 25 Aprilis, 1577.
   Yours in Christe,
   E. Cant.
   To my lovinge frende M=r=. Doctor Hutton, Deane off Yorke.

<Q HUT 1577 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 57>
[} [\LETTER VI.\] CECYLL LORD BURGHLEY TO MR. DEANE OF YORKE.}]
[^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\August 12, 1577.\]
   Good Mr. Deane, I most hartely thank [{you{] for your harty
commendations, which this berer M=r=. Ramsden delyveyred me,
with a token in gold, being the monument of the good elect kyng
Edward my master, whom God took seasonably for his soule to be a
kyng in heaven, and onseasonably from this his erthely kyngdom,
therby blessing hym, and scourgyng vs. God favor vs now in the
reigne of our Soverayn with more of his
<P 58>
marcy, though I feare our offences ar gretar ...
From Buxton, the xii=th= of August, 1577.
   Your most assured loving Frend,
   W. Burghley.
   God contynew his graces in you, by which your liff and
actions ar reported very good of all your neighbors; and in
sekyng to reform those that ar ovt of the waye, the ordinary
waye to reduce them which I heare you vse is, by gentle
instruction of them first to se and fele ther palpable errors,
and so to prepare them to se the truth.
   To my very louing ffrend M=r=. Doctor Hutton, Deane of the
Cathedrall Churche at Yorke.

<Q HUT 1577 EGRINDALL>
<A EDMUND GRINDALL>
<G M>
<P 58>
[} [\LETTER VII.\] GRYNDALL, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, TO DR.
HUTTON, DEAN OF YORK.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\2 Dec. 1577.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) This bringer can informe you
somethinge off my state bothe for my healthe off my bodye and
other my trobles. Aboute 6 weeks agoe, and so on further tyll
the 26 off November, I was putt in assured hoape off libertie,
&c. Abowte thatt tyme arose a sudeyn contrarie tempest, which
hadde browghte me to have appeared in the Starre Chamber 29
Novembris last, iff God had nott layed me up 2 dayes before off
myne olde disease the stoane. By thatt occasion my apparence was
respitted, and I now remayne as a man in suspense (\inter spem
metumque\) , butt yett hoape that God wille in the ende turne
all to the beste. I thanke ye for your manifold significations
off your goode wille towarde me and myne. I praye
<P 59>
ye be goode to the bringer in that ye maye lawfullye, commende
me as ye knowe. God kepe you. 2 December, 1577.
   Yours in Christe,
   E. C.
   To my lovinge frende, M=r=. Deane off Yorke.

<Q HUT 1578 HHASTINGS>
<A EARL OF HUNTINGDON>
<G M>
<P 59>
[} [\LETTER VIII.\] THE EARLE OF HUNTINGDON TO MR. DEANE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\Maie 20, 1578.\]
   (\Salutem in Domino, &c.!\) I am sorrye to vnderstand of your
falle and harme you have therbye, but I trust God will shortelye
restore you to your olde good state agayne. Of my Lord of
Canterburie I heare nothyng but thys; I wyll sette downe the
verrye wordes as they bee wrytten to me: - "My Lord of
Canterburie dyd stande now at thys present vpon hys delyuerye by
the good meanes of M=r=. Vycechamberlyne, and now at thys
present the bysshoppes of Durram and Yorke have wryttyn to hyr
Majesty of soche sectes and puritanes that ys in those cuntryes,
that hathe made a staye of hys delyuerance."
   Even nowe the Lord Archebishop was heare, and I tolde hym a
peece of thys matter, but sayde no worde of Canterburie, and I
dyd aske hym what infection he founde in all hys dyoces,
especyallye for puritanisme as they tearme yt. He aunsweryd,
that he founde none to offend that way, neythyr, sayth he, have
I wryttyn any thynge thereof; but in my letters to the Quene,
sayth he, I dyd wryte that a younge man in a sermon at the
assyses dyd sumwhat straye, but he hathe been before me and
hathe promysyd to repayre the faute, etc. Also of one at Hulle
who made sum scruple at sum matters, but now yealdeth and
promysyth conformytee. Of other matters he dyd not wryte, but of
the increasynge of the papystes, etc. By thys I see som sparkes
have floane abrode. Your wrytar hathe desyryd me to sent hym
worde what ys trew touchinge these reaportes. And now by
warrante from my Lord's grace I may saye hys dyoces ys cleare of
thys faulte. For other occuranttes I referre
<P 60>
you to the letter inclosyd, wherof I dyd imparte the laste
parte, as I was desyryd. God make us all pure in hys syghte
thorrowe Chryste, and confounde all poperye and counterfayte
gospellynge, etc. And so I commytte you to the Lord. At Yorke,
thys 26 of May, 1578.
   Your assured frend (\in Domino\) ,
   H. Huntyngdon.
   To the assemblie at Smalcald her Maiestie hath sent certeine
persons to dissuade and stay the proceedings, &c. D. Humfrey of
Oxford, D. Wilson of Worcester, D. Still of Cambridge, and D.
Hamond, a civilian, ar appointed for this purpose; and, if hast
had not required, your Deane Mr. Hutton should have bene the
principall, and so ought he to have bene allowed. Grenewich, xx
Maij, 1578.

<Q HUT 1579 EGRINDALL>
<A EDMUND GRINDALL>
<G M>
<P 60>
[} [\LETTER IX.\] GRYNDALL, ARCHB. CANT. [\TO DOCTOR MATTHEW
HUTTON, DEAN OF YORK.\] }]
[\18 Feb. 1578-9.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) This bringer can enforme you that I
am (thanks be to God!) in reasonable goode healthe. My case
dependeth longe, as ye see, and some repulse off sute latelye
made hathe bene geven; and yett, iff a man maye beleve in courte
promesses, I was att no tyme so neare an ende off my trobles as
att this present. (\Domini voluntas fiat.\) I praye you shew
favor to the bringer for perfitinge off his longe travells.
<P 61>
S. Peter is a goode man, and lendeth freelye; the marchante
allwayes harpeth apon interest. He will engage all to S. Peter
or some off his deputies. Surelye the thinge will proove to an
vndoubted beniffitte bothe publicke and private. Yff I had
remayned with you, I wolde have helped him in this case;
especiallye nowe when the matter is growen rype, etc.
   Howe the worlde goeth here, ye shall heare by other men. I
wolde ye hadde a goode arrande to London, that I mighte see you.
I thanke you for my poore kinsfolkes and servants. God kepe you.
18 Feb., 1578.
   E. C. (\tuus\)
   To my lovinge frende M=r=. Deane off Yorke.

<Q HUT 1582 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 63>
[} [\LETTER XII.\] A LETTER FROM DEAN HUTTON TO THE EARL OF
HUNTINGDON.}] [^TO HENRY HASTINGS^]
[\8 May, 1582.\]
   My most humble duitie remembred to your Honour, &c. M=r=.
Doctor Gibson hath obteined a dispensation to keepe his livinge
in our church, whereof I am verie gladd. But in the same
dispensation he hath obtained another dispensation; that he
beinge absent, and keeping no residence, may have and enjoye all
the commodities due to a residentiarie: for the which I am verie
sorrie; not onelie because it is contrarie to our statutes,
whereunto we are all sworne, and shall be taken out of the
livinge of the residenciaries, some being not well hable to
spare it; but also because it doth open a window, which (if it
be not speedelie shutt) is like utterlie to overthrow the state
of our churche. We think that her Majesty's meaninge was, that
he should enjoie his livinge hereafter quietlie, which now by
the space of fyve or six yeares he hath bene in some feare to be
deprived of; and not to gyve him a new livinge taken furth of
other men's lyvyngs; and for the which they are bound to keepe
residence xxvi. weeks yearlie to their great charge. Yet,
because we love quietness and hate contention, we have neither
joyned nor conferred with his enemies; but have sent M=r=.
Slater, one of our companie, to my Lord his Grace of
Canterburie, Doctor Gibson's good Lord and ours, prayinge him to
make some quiet end betweene him and us, becawse we wold be
lothe to joyne with Doctor Gibson's
<P 64>
adversaries against hym. And my humble suit, in myne owne name
and in the name of the whole Churche, unto your Honour is, to
beseeche you that you wold be a meane to my Lord of Canterburye,
and to join with him to componde the matter, least it grow to
some extremitie of suit; which thinge I have alwaies hated. Ffor
myne owne part, I could be content, and so I know wold the rest,
yt were referred unto yourselfe to heare and determine at your
cominge into the country, yf my Lord his Grace of Canterburie
doe not now end it by your Lordshipp's good meanes, as we hope
he will. We have written to my Lord Treasurar, and to Sir
Francis Walsingham, beseechinge them to have a speciall care,
and to be meanes, that suche like suites be not graunted
hereafter, which tend to the decaye and ruine of the churches of
the old fundation. Yff the matter be not quietlie ended, we make
no doubte but to make good proofe to the Lords of the Counsell,
that so muche of the dispensation as is hurtfull to the churche,
and taketh from other men, and gyveth unto hym which he never
hadd before, did procede upon wronge information. M=r=. Doctor
Gibson is my good frend, and I have alwaies wished him well, and
verie lothe wold I be to joyne with his enemies; which had bene
done before this time yf it could have bene compassed. And
therefore am I so earnest with your Lordship that the matter may
be stayed, now at the begyninge. Thus, beseechinge God to send
your Honour and my good Ladie shortlie into the countrie, I take
my leave. From Yorke, the viij=th= of Maye, 1582.
   Your Honour's in Christ to comaunde,
   Matth. Hutton.
   To the Right Honorable his especiall good Lord, therle of
Huntingdon, Lord praesident of her Majesty's Counsell in the
North parts.

<Q HUT 1582 EGRINDALL>
<A EDMUND GRINDALL>
<G M>
<P 66>
[} [\LETTER XIV.\] GRYNDALL, ARCHBYSHOP OF CANTERBURIE, [\TO
DOCTOR HUTTON, DEAN OF YORK.\] }] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\19 May, 1582.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) Yf I hadd not this daye ben trobled
with muche writinge and some busines of great weight, I wolde
have written to you my particuler letter at more length
concernynge Doctor Gibson's case; but I praie you beare with me
for this tyme, and for a few daies more, till Doctor Gibson come
downe, and at his comyinge I truste to have better leasure and
quyetnes to write my mynde in some thinge more at large unto
you. I have written a generall letter to you and to the Chapter,
which I praie you to accept well of, and not to judge hastelie
before the tyme. So I take my leave, and commendinge you to the
grace of Godd. From Lambeth, this xix=th= of Maye, 1582.
   Yours in Christe,
   E. Cant.
   To my verie lovinge ffrende, Mr. Doctor Hutton, Deane of
Yorke.

<Q HUT 1582 EGRINDALL>
<A EDMUND GRINDALL>
<G M>
<P 67>
[} [\LETTER XV.\] GRYNDALL, ARCHB. CANTERBURY, [\TO THE DEAN AND
CHAPTER OF YORK.\] }] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\19 May, 1582.\]
   After my verie hartie commendacions. Whereas some matter of
difference hath growen of late betwene you and M=r=. Doctor
Gibson concernynge a graunte obtayned by him of her Majestie for
enioyinge the profitts of residence within your churche as well
absente as presente, I doe understande, aswell by your owne
letters to me directed, as by the reporte and commission of
M=r=. Slater and M=r=. Lyndlie your mandatories, that you are
contented to referre the said controversie or difference to my
order, and in suche sorte as the matter shall goe no furder. I
hartelie thanke you for the truste and confidence which you
repose in me, and wolde be sorie to geve you any cause to the
contrarie; for I love your churche well in generalle, and wishe
well unto everie one of your in particuler. And notwithstandinge
the orderinge and determynacion of the matter aforesaid nowe in
question is symplie committed vnto me by consente of bothe
partes, yet I have learned partelie by myne owne experience, and
partelie by the experience of other notable persons which have
ben more experte in suche cases then I have ben, not to sett
downe in suche cases any precise or absolute order withowt the
good likinge and assent of bothe the parties: wherefore, for
your better satisfaccion in this behalf, I will sende downe
Doctor Gibson to you, betwene this and Whitsontyde, to treat
with you in reasonable and frendlie order for a finall ende of
this difference; which if it may be obteyned at the first by
your mutuall consents in suche sorte as shalbe by him moved and
declared unto you, and here thought by divers learned men
agreable to lawe and not unreasonable, I shalbe verie gladd. And
if it shall chaunce that the condicions offered by the said
Doctor Gibson shall not be lyked of you, I will take suche
further order with the said Doctor Gibson when he cometh downe,
that he shall offer you other condicions which ye can not in
reason mislike. And so, praienge you to beare with patience a
little respite
<P 68>
of tyme for a few daies, I promise you, as I have done to your
deputies M=r=. Lyndlye and M=r=. Slater, that I will make a
quyet ende of this controversie. And therefore I have willed
them not to deliver those letters which they hadd from you to
divers honorable personages, because I wolde have the matter to
goe no further, as thinkinge my self to have sufficient
commission from you by vertue of your letters so to doe. So I
take my leave, and hartelie commende you to the grace of Godd.
From Lambeth this xix=th= of Maye, 1582.
   Yours in Christe,
   E. Cant.
   To my verie lovinge ffrends M=r=. Doctor Hutton, Deane of
Yorke, and to the rest of the Chapter of the same churche.

<Q HUT 1582 EGRINDALL>
<A EDMUND GRINDALL>
<G M>
<P 68>
[} [\LETTER XVI.\] THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY TO THE DEAN OF
YORK.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\26 May, 1582.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) Accordinge unto my promise made unto
you and the Chapter, I have sente downe M=r=. Doctor Gibson,
bringer hereof, to make a finall ende of the difference betwene
you and him concernyng the matter of residence. And whatsoever I
write unto you in this letter, I will praye you that it maye be,
as the olde terme is, (\sub sigillo confessionis\) , and not to
be imparted to any creature, unlesse you your self first have a
good lykinge of the motion herein by me made, and be also
assured that your Chapter will have the lyke; ffor I wolde be
sorye that any motion made by me sholde come to your Chapter and
there suffer repulse. Therefore I have chosen privately and
frendlye to deale with you, who is the headd of the Chapter and
knoweth verie well the disposition of the reste. After I hadd
received your letters of commission to arbitrate the matter of
residence aforesaid, I thought it verye requisite first to
understande of what validitie M=r=. Doctor Gibson's graunte was
by lawe, and for that purpose I charged Doctor Drewrye and
Doctor Awbrey that they sholde, withowt respect of persons,
<P 69>
geve me their opynions in writinge; which they dyd under there
hands in a letter, the copie of which letter I sende unto you
enclosed herein. After that, I fell to treatye with M=r=. Slater
and M=r=. Lyndley to understande the determynacion of you and
the Chapter, what you wolde geve M=r=. Gybson in yerely pencion
till suche tyme as he entered actuall residence; nothinge
dowtinge but they hadd sufficient commission and instruccions to
geve answere in that matter. They offered first xx=tie= nobles a
yere, and after that x=li=, and at length with muche adoe they
came to xx=tie= markes a yere, which I thought was to litle, and
Doctor Gibson did utterly myslike of it; and I then thought as
nowe I will utter my mynde frankly unto you, that in suche a
case forty markes a yere, for a yere, two, or three, till he
entered into actuall residence, was litle enough, the particuler
porcions of your commodities of the residensarye (which are to
me reasonably well knowen) beinge considered. But findinge your
deputies not willinge to goe any further than xx=tie= markes,
and peradventure not havinge commission to doe any otherwise, I
dyd not name any summe unto them, but differred the matter till
Doctor Gibson's commynge, as you knowe. Nowe, good M=r=. Deane,
if you can condiscende to this fortye markes for a yere or two
till Doctor Gibson can be better provided and furnished for
residence, and be assured that your Chapter withowt difficultie
will assente unto the same, I praye you move it to your Chapter;
which if you and they doe graunte, I shall take it in verie
thankfull parte, as done the rather at my requeste. But if you
fynde either any scruple in your self, or thinke there wilbe
difficultie in the Chapter in the grauntinge of the same, then I
praye you of all frendshipp that this my letter maye be utterlye
suppressed, and not divulged to any creature. And, that beinge
done, I have taken order with Doctor Gibson that he shall enter
into a new treatye with you particulerlye, which maye afterwarde
be communycated to your Chapter, which also I truste wilbe
thought bothe of you and them verye reasonable. And thus,
takinge my leave for this tyme, I hartely commende you unto the
grace of Godd. From Croydon, this xxvi=th= of Maye, 1582. Yours
in Christe, as of olde,
   E. Cant.
   To my verie lovinge ffrende Mr. Doctor Hutton, Deane of York.

<Q HUT 1582 EGRINDALL>
<A EDMUND GRINDALL>
<G M>
<P 70>
[} [\LETTER XVII.\] ARCHBISHOP GRINDALL TO THE DEAN OF YORK.}]
[^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\26 May, 1582.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) M=r=. Deane, I have taken order with
M=r=. Doctor Gibson, that if the request of my former letter, by
him nowe sente and unto you at his first conference with you
delivered, were of you any waye mislyked, or that you dowted any
thinge of the free and willinge assent of your Chapter without
any difficultie thereunto, that then he shall deliver unto you
this my seconde letter; wherein I signifie unto you, that, the
cause of your mislikinge standinge as afore, I have concluded
with Doctor Gibson that he shall offer unto you and your Chapter
to enter into ordinarye residence, and bear all charges for the
same as is requysite, notwithstandinge that the said entrie
into residence at this tyme will be verie muche to his
hinderance. And so I truste bothe all inconvenyances alledged by
your letters and deputies shalbe clearly removed, and the desire
of you and your Chapter declared unto me by your said deputies
shall be fully satisfied, and so all controversies, I truste,
perfectlie ended. And I shall furder praye you that my former
letter at this praesente delyvered by M=r=. Doctor Gibson may be
immediately, upon the receipte of this, toren in pieces and
utterlye destroyed in the sight of the said Doctor Gibson,
because I wolde not have any matter of diversitie in opynion
betwene you, your Chapter, and me, to be extante under my hande;
not onely hartely praienge you, but also as it were adjuringe
you, not to revele the contents of my said letter to any boddye.
So, referringe the rest unto M=r=. Doctor Gibson's owne reporte,
once againe I take my leave, and commende you with all my harte
to the grace of Godd. From Croydon, this xxvi=th= of May, 1582.
   Yours in Christe, as of olde; remayning still blynde, with
ffather Tobyas, and yet hoping assuredlye by the grace of Godd
to recover sight againe, as he dyd in tyme.
   E. Cant.
   To my verie lovinge ffrende, M=r=. Doctor Hutton, Deane of
Yorke.

<Q HUT 1582 KHASTINGS>
<A LADY HUNTINGDON>
<G F>
<P 71>
[} [\LETTER XVIII.\] LADY HUNTINGDON TO MR. DEANE OF YORKE.}]
[^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\8=ber= 22, 1582.\]
   Good M=r=. Deane, Allthowgh I have not writen to you since mi
coming from Yorke about the matter I had to speak with mi
brother of Lecester of, because I have bin so often coming doune
mi self, which I have bin ever staied bi one occasion or other;
and nowe that mi Lord will not lett me come doune before
Chrismus, I will not defere any longer to lett you knowe I did
remember that matter presently upon mi comming up, of whom I had
so good an awnswere, with so manie good words, and of his verie
good opinion of you, as in truth I was most glad to here. Of
this matter I wold have writen to you longe before this time,
but that I was in good hope to have bin at Yorke mi self, and so
to have told you what I had done in that same; but that can not
be so sone as in deed I do wish and desire it: and therfore I
thought it good to troble you with this mi bad scribling, though
it hath ben long a cominge, that you maie knowe I was not
forgetfull of you. I am to geve you great thanks for my aunt
Comten, and the rest of mi wemen, whom [{I{] perceive you have
bin trobled with all. And so, good M=r=. Deane, I must hastely
bid you fare well, and wish there were any thing here I might do
you plesure in: you shuld finde me verie redie to do it. From
Stoke, the 22 of October, 1582.
   Your verie frend in the Lorde,
   K. Huntingdon.

<Q HUT 1583 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 71>
[} [\LETTER XIX.\] THE BYSHOP OF WORSTRE, ELECT CANT., TO MR.
DEANE OF YORK.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\17 Sept. 1583.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I hartelie thangk you, good M=r=.
Dene, for your frendlie letters, where in you shoe that assured
good
<P 72>
wyll which I have ever fownd in you towards me. The burden layed
uppon me ys verie heavie and great; yet, bycause yt ys God's
owne doeing who hath wrogght yt in her Majestie's hart, my trust
ys that he wyll also furnish me with gyfts and graces
necessarie, that I may, without faynting, performe that
whereunto he hath so called me; and the rather thorowe your good
prayers, whereof I assuer my self. I have not hard anie thing of
you or M=r=. Cheke touching that matter, nether wyll I beleave
yt yf yt shold be reported, knoweng you bothe so well as I doe.
For your nephew, I wyll be glad to do the best I can, as
occasion shal serve. To stay you there, I wyll do my endevor,
onlesse yt be for some better preforment: but assuer your self
that I wyll not cease to labor you frome thens, yf yt may be to
such a place as wyll countervale that, and wherein you may doe
more good. Towching the last poynt of your letters, nothing
shalbe omytted that lieth in me: yt ys a wonde in dede, God
graunte yt may be healed. Her Majestie ys moste gratiouslie
affected therein, and there ys hope to bring yt to passe: there
are, God be thangked, manie learned and worthie men, so that
there lacketh no choise; I besech God that such respect may be
had to there praeferment as the Church may be furnished with
worthie men, and others thereby encoraged. Thus, with my hartie
commendations, I committ you to the tuition of Almyghtie God.
Frome Lambeth, the 17 of September, 1583.
   Yours as hys owne,
   Jo. Wigorn. Elect. Cant.
   To my assuered and loving frend, Mr. Doctor Hutten, Dene of
York.

<Q HUT 1583 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 73>
[} [\LETTER XX.\] LETTER FROM ABP. WHITGIFT TO DEAN HUTTON.}]
[^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\23 August, 1586.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I am verie sorie that it is no better
betwixt my Lord of York and you, and that his bitternesse
continueth still against you, which I doe also perceave by his
owne lettres written to my self. I pray you consider, for the
redeeming of peace and quietnesse, and the avoiding of publick
offense, whether it were not better for you and the rest to
yeeld unto him in one or both his patents. (\E duobus malis,
&c.\) But I referre the consideration hereof to yourself. Many
thinges are to be done and suffered for peace sake. His Grace
writeth unto mee, that you and your frendes geve it out howe
well you were used at my handes, howe sure a frende I am unto
you, and what favour you found with Lordes, &c., and many other
thinges. But I knowe theis are but reportes brought unto him by
suche as could bee content to have you at oddes still. For myne
owne parte, I wish you bothe so well, that, to make you frendes
and to reconcile you together, I would bee content, yf it so
pleased her Majesty, to ryde from Croydon to York, yea, to
Barwick, or fyve tymes furder. (\Vale in Christo!\) From my
house at Croydon, this xxiij=th= of August 1586.
   Your assured lovinge frende,
   Jo. Cantuar.
   To the right worshippful my verie loving frende, M=r=. Doctor
Hutton, Dean of York.

<Q HUT 1590 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 77>
[} [\LETTER XXVI.\] LORD BURGHLEY TO MY LORD OF DURESME.}] [^TO
DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\Aug. 21, 1590.\]
   After my vearie hartie commendacions to your Lordship. I have
received your Lordship's lettre, whearebie youe move mee to
graunt to your dawghter, the widowe of M=r=. D. Slater, one
<P 78>
of the Prebendaries of the churche of Yorke, latelie decessed,
the wardshippe of hir child, with the custodie of the land, and
patronage of the rectorie of Bainton, which it semeth he had
purchased, whearein I shall be verie well contented to pleisure
your Lordship; althowgh theire hath been suite made unto mee
both by M=r=. Osborne of the eschecquer for the said personage
for Archdeacon Remington, a man verie well lerned as he
informeth mee, and whoe hath also married another of your
dawghters; and the like suite hath been made to mee heare by the
Deane of Yorke, whoe offreth for the same to resyne a benefice
he hath in this parte in the southe; and yet nevertheles the
same shall be soe disposed as your Lordship shall require. And
so I verye hartelie commend mee to your Lordship. From the Cort,
this xxi=st= of August, 1590.
   Your Lordship's verie lovinge frend,
   W. Burghley.
   To the Reverend Father in God, my vearie good Lord the Bishop
of Durham.

<Q HUT 1600 RCECIL>
<A ROBERT CECIL>
<G M>
<P 78>
[} [\LETTER XXVII.\] SIR ROB. CECYLL TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\September 1.\] [^1600.^]
   May it please your Grace: Althoughe, when I dyd wryte my
letters unto you in favour of M=r=. Fant, I labored not to
presse your Grace with any ernestnes of wordes, because her
Majestie's letters were so gracyously and effectually wrytten at
that tyme, which seemed to be of strenghte sufficient to
prevayle in so reasonable a matter; yet, uppon your aunsweare,
and viewe of that which hath synce fallen out in the prosecution
of his sute with my cosen Stanhoppe, (by whom I am sorry it was
his happe to be in that sort crossed,) I have bethought me howe
by your Grace's meanes, bothe my cosen may retayne the hold he
hathe already, as you ernestly desyre he should, and the
gentleman lykewyse be otherwyse in some reasonable manner
satisfyed. And
<P 79>
that is, that it would please your Grace to fynde out some other
lease belonging to that sea, wherein you may make him an estate
(\de bene esse\) , (suche as it is knowen your Grace may doe,)
without any other scruple of conscience, or hinderance to your
selfe; so it be a thing that may in some good measure be
answerable to his former expectancy, which nowe he will
thereuppon be content to relinquishe. For your Grace may very
well conceave, that her Majestie, by the great ernestnes and
charge that her lettres caryed, had a most gratyous meaninge
towards hym for the effecting of his desyre; which albeit it may
in the particuler receave some stoppe, (and the rather in that
place where it dyd,) yet would I be loth she should understand
that her lettres dyd ether become frustrate, or not receave such
entertainment at your Grace's hands as they do well deserve, and
the present occasyon requyreth. I doe therefore pray your Grace
to conferre with my cosen, to th' end something may be effected
agreable to that her Majestie intended towards hym; whether it
be by graunt of a lease, or some porcyon of money to be raysed
uppon some tennants that seeke to have their estates renewed,
(in which kynde it seemethe your Grace had a purpose to gyve him
contentment,) so that the sayd somme may recompence in a good
proporcyon the losse of his former hope; which, being of a thing
partly in his owne possessyon, was therefore so well grounded,
as in regarde thereof, and also of the great meanes he hath
used, together with his charge and travayle therein, deserveth
suche good respect and consideracion as may be any wayes
expected from your Grace, who have ever shewed your selfe most
willing to accomplish her Majestie's demaunds when they have ben
nether so ernestly written, nor in a more reasonable cause then
this, wherin her gracyous desposycion should not so lightly be
passed over. And so, hoping to receave your comfortable
aunsweare, which is expected, I commend your Grace to God's
protecion. From the Cort at Oateland's, the first of Sept. 1600.
   Your Grace's very loving and assured friend,
   Ro. Cecyll.
   To the most reverent Father in God, my very good Lorde the
Lord
Archbishop of Yorke's Grace, one of the Counsell established in
the north parte.

<Q HUT 1594 RCECIL>
<A ROBERT CECIL>
<G M>
<P 86>
[} [\LETTER XXXII.\] SIR ROB. CECYLL TO MY LORD OF DURESME.}]
[^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\October 13, 1594.\]
   My good Lorde, I have understoode by your lettre with what
willingnes your Lordship hath bestowed on me the righte you have
in the wardeshipp of one Buckle, wherin your Lordship writeth
lykewyse to me to nominate some such personne in whose name I
would have the same to passe. For the first I doe returne your
Lordship my very hartie thankes, assuring you, that in any
occasion offred me I will make requittall therof towards your
Lordship or any or yours; and for the other matter, because
there is some lykelihood that he may be found lykewise a warde
to the Queene by the tenure of some lands hereabout, I have
procured a graunt of her Majesty's tytle if there be any suche
proved. And nowe, to the intent I mought receave from your
Lordship such a graunt as may be of validitie unto me, I am
desirous to have the deed made by the advise of some of my
councell, and therfore doe most hartely pray your Lordship to
send me up a copie of the inquisicion taken in that contrye,
wherby suche particularites may be knowen here as shalbe fytt to
be inserted into the graunt; which course I knowe shalbe to your
Lordship all one (seing you meane to give); that the gifte may
be so framed as may not be subject to questyon hereafter: and
for the more expedicion hereof I pray your Lordship that it may
be sent up by some of the ordynary posts that runne betwene
Duresme and the Court. It is very true that I am fullie
persuaded that there wilbe a title found for the Queene, wherin
(althoughe it so fallinge out) your Lordship's graunt
<P 87>
shall not be needfull; yet shall my thankes be as due unto you,
and my readynes to requytt the same in any thinge wherin I may
have occasion. And so I commend your Lordship to God's
favourable proteccion. From my house in the Strand, the xiij=th=
of Octobre, 1594.
   Your Lordship's very loving and assured friende,
   Ro: Cecyll.
   To the Reverend Father in God, my very good Lorde, the Lorde
Bushopp of Duresme.

<Q HUT 1594 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 87>
[} [\LETTER XXXIII.\] A LETTER FROM ARCHBISHOP WHITGIFT TO
BISHOP HUTTON.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\4 Nov. 1594.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I dowte not but that your Lordship
understandeth of her Majestie's disposition to remove you to
Yorke. I have signifyed to her Highnesse that you are better, in
respect of living, now where you are placed, and that I thowght
you wold be lothe to remove. She answered that you shal remove,
and that you are well able to bere the charges thereof: so that
you must prepare yourself thereto, if this resolution hold, as I
think it will. I wold not have written to you of this matter
until yt had bene fullie concluded, but for the importunitie of
your man. And so, with my verie hartie commendations, I commit
you to the tuition of Almyghtie God. From Lamb. the 4 of Novemb.
1594.
   Your Lordship's loving brother and frend,
   Jo: Cantuar.
   To the Right Reverend in Christe my verie good Lord and
brother, the Bishop of Durham.

<Q HUT 1594 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 88>
[} [\LETTER XXXIV.\] WHYTGYFT, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, TO THE
BISHOP OF DURHAM.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\2 Dec. 1594.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) Yesterday, beeng the first of this
monethe, her Majestie in the praesens of all her cousell did
nominate such as are to be placed in the bishoppricks voyde and
to be voyde: as namelie your self to York; D=r=. Matthew to
Durham; the bishop of Wigorn to London; and M=r=. Day, dene of
Windsor, to Wigorne. The bishop of Lincolne to Winton; the
bishop of Chester to Lincolne; the bishop of Bangor to Chester;
and one D=r=. Vaughan, an honest and learned man, to Bangor.
M=r=. Redman, archdeacon of Canterbury, to Norwich; the bishop
of Landafe to Exitor. God be thangked, as good a choyse as can
be desyered. There is order gyvne for the consecration, and
therefore your Lordship shal do well to send upp some to followe
your businesse here. And I am glad that there ys so good a cause
to bring you hether so sone. (\Vale in Christo!\) Frome Lamb.
the 2 of Decemb. 1594.
   Your Lordship's loving frend and brother,
   Jo: Cantuar.
   To the Reverend Father in God, my verie good Lord and
brother, the Bishop of Durham.

<Q HUT 1594 TMATTHEW>
<A TOBIE MATTHEW>
<G M>
<P 91>
[} [\LETTER XXXVII.\] DR. TOBIE MATTHEW, DEAN OF DURHAM, TO DR.
MATTHEW HUTTON, BISHOP OF DURHAM.}]
[\6 Dec. 1594.\]
   My bounden dutie humbly and heartily remembred to your good
Lordship, with manie lyk thanks for my last and best
intertainment, beyond the expectation of some that would needes
make me beleve otherwise then nowe I see and fynde that there
was cause. But I send your Lordship in liewe thereof (having not
of myne owne to requite your Lordship's great favor therein)
these included from your Lordship's verie good Lord and myne,
the Lord Chamberlaine, and therwithall the predominant prelacie
of this province. God geve your Lordship longe and muche
prosperitie therein, and make me worthie to be your successor
here in tyme, which his Lordship signifieth unto me to be her
Majestie's pleasure also. Wherein if it please God to place me,
your Lordship shall have as obedient and faithfull a successor
as any whatsoever could have been nominated therunto; whiche
tyme, the mother of truth, shall prove. I have hitherto silenced
this present busines both your Lordship's and myne, for that I
knowe not whether your Lordship will have it knowen as yet.
Thus, humbly desyring the continuance of your Lordship's good
opinion and favor, I betake your Lordship to the grace of God,
who reward our most gratious soveraigne and many many yeres
preserve her Majestie! At Duresme, 6 December, 1594. In haste as
is required.
   Your Lordship's humble and assured at commandement,
   Tobie Matthew.
   My humble commendacions to good M=rs=. Hutton.
   To the Right Reverend Father in God, and my verie good Lord,
my Lord Bushopp of Duresme at Awkeland, with spede.

<Q HUT 1594 TMATTHEW>
<A TOBIE MATTHEW>
<G M>
<P 92>
[} [\LETTER XXXIX.\] DR. TOBIE MATTHEW, DEAN OF DURHAM, TO DR.
MATTHEW HUTTON, BISHOP OF DURHAM.}] 
[\31 Dec. 1594.\]
   My verie honorable good Lord and father, Being glad to heare
that your Lordship is hable so strongly to wreastle with your
coulde, I have presumed to present this booke of figures to your
<P 93>
Lordship, fitt for your eies to passe awaie the tyme, while you
have better healthe to reade greater maters, but yet not of
greater persons. Your Lordship's letters I take in dutifull and
thankefull parte, and according to my bounden dutie doe and will
ever (whether you think good to remove or abyde) wisshe your
Lordship and good M=rs=. Hutton the renewing of many happie
yeares, everie one more happie then other, to the pleasure of
Almightie God, that Ancient of daies, and to the comfort of all
that depend upon you here and elsewhere. Thus humbly for this
present taking leave of your Lordship. At Duresme, (\ult.
Decemb.\) 1594.
   Your reverend Lordship's most humble in Christ,
   Tobie Matthew.
   To the Right Reverend Father in God, and my verie good Lord,
my Lord Bushop of Duresme, at Awkland.

<Q HUT 1595 TMATTHEW>
<A TOBIE MATTHEW>
<G M>
<P 95>
[} [\LETTER XLI.\] DR. TOBIE MATTHEW TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON,
BISHOP OF DURHAM.}] 
[\29 Jan. 1594-5.\]
   My bounden dutie and thankfulnes remembred to your good
Lordship. I receaved yesterdaie from my Lord Lieutenant these
enclosed from M=r=. Dethick by poste, wherwith I thought meete
to acquaint your Lordship, that yow maie therby partely perceave
how thinges goe and come. My brother D. wanteth good advise in
myne opinion. For myne owne parte, I must and doe referre my
selfe wholely to the divine providence of God, to her Majestie's
gratious favor, still continewed for ought I can learne, and to
your Lordship's good furtherance as tyme and occasion shall
serve, which I humbly desyre and will unfainedly seeke to
deserve alwaies. Your Lordship is godlie wise; you will doe
nothin but what you maie doe with a good conscience and with
honorable credit. What that is no man can judge of better then
your self, having therunto all the helpes that maie be. (\Sed
noli justus esse nimium\) : yet I knowe also what followeth.
Your Lordship, I presume, will geve me leave - 
   (\"Si bene quid facias, facias cito: nam cito factum Gratum
erit, ingratum gratia tarda facit."\)
God loveth, and so doe princes, a cherefull gever. (\Noli
perdere substantiam propter accidens.\) Thinges be not as they
be, but as they be taken. Olde frendes loke to be used after the
olde fasshion. Newe frendes are not like the olde, neither so
well knowen, nor so easily kept, nor so assuredly to be trusted,
if and when a man hath or maie nede them. Sy. Comyn, my man, is
about the churche's affayres to goe toward London upon
<P 96>
Frydaie next. If your Lordship have any letters or busines that
he can doe, I dare undertake he shall doe it carefully and
faithfully. Thus, humbly craving pardon if I have exceeded, and
hoping your Lordship will impute it rather to the plainnesse of
my heart toward you then to any presumption, I wisshe your
Lordship longe to live and prosper, to God's glorie, and comfort
of all this province. At Duresme, 29 Jan. 1594.
   Your Lordship's most humble assured alwaies,
   Tobie Matthew.
   To the Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God, the
Lord Bushop of Duresme, my verie good Lord, at Awkeland.

<Q HUT 1595 RCECIL>
<A ROBERT CECIL>
<G M>
<P 101>
[} [\LETTER XLVI.\] SIR ROB. CECYLL TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\16 April, 1595.\]
   May it please your Grace. Becawse I knoe it was and shalbe
her Majestie's honour to grace so reverent a prelate as your
Grace is, especially in such a case as this, I have thoght good
to use my best oportunity to remember to her Majesty the pardon
for the Lady Nevyll, by whose example as others I hope may be
induced to shew the like conformity, so will this her Majestie's
lenity stopp the liing tongs of them that wold insinuate by
lybells and raylings that her Majestie's mercy is to seldome
shewed; whereof, God be thanked, no kingdome hath under any of
God's ministers ever tasted so many good fruicts: and therfore,
seing I knew it wold be expected that you shold bring it with
you as God's instrument of this woork, I was glad to finish it
so as you might be assured to affirme that it was don, and
therfore have I thoght it not amiss by these presents to assure
your Grace that this very houre her Majesty hath signed it unto
me; and, but that I do knoe it must pass the seales, I wold have
sent it after you with this. I have therfore sent it to M=r=.
Roger Manners, who I think wyll cawse it to be followed. If you
wyll have it otherwise, your Grace may wryte back; and to whom
you wyll have it comitted over, it shalbe. Her Majesty hath also
promised a pension of 40=li= a-yeare, which I will also see
finished. And thus, in hast, I wish your Grace a good journey,
and remaine your loving poor freend assuredly,
   Ro. Cecyll.
   I have receaved a lettre from your Grace concerning my
brother Brook.
   For her Majesty's affaires. To the most Reverend ffather in
God, my very good Lord, the Lord Archbushop of Yorke, his Grace
Metrapolitane of England.
   Hast, post hast, hast, hast, hast!
   At Whitehall, 16 April, at past 7 at night. 
   Ro. Cecyll.

<Q HUT 1595 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 104>
[} [\LETTER XLVIII.\] A LETTER FROM THE ARCHBYSHOP OF CANTERBURY
TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\19 Aug. 1595.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) My very good Lord, I must become an
earnest suiter to you in the behalf of M=r=. Edwyn Sandys for
the continuance and increase of your Grace's good favor towards
him. I doubt not but that you doe hold him in that accompt which
hee very well deserves. Notwithstanding, for the great care
which I have that he may doe well and bee incouraged by all
meanes in his good and studiouse endevours, I praye you most
hartelye that he may both have your good countenance and
comforte in those partes, and cheeflye that for such leases as
hee holdes of your Grace (being the chiefe stay of his lyving)
hee may renue them at your handes for his reasonable ffine with
favoure. I doubte not but my request will seme to your
reasonable, and the gentleman so worthie to be cherished and
encouraged, that I shall not need to use with you anie further
perswasion. And so, with my hartie commendacions, I committ yow
to the tuicion of Allmightie God. From Croydon, the xix=th= of
August, 1595.
   Your Grace's loving brother in Christe,
   Jo. Cantuar.
   I pray you send me youre resolution (together with youre
opinion of the recantation) of these poyntes: (\An sola Dei
voluntas, absque respectu aliquo ad peccatum, sit causa
reprobationis?\)
   And whether yt be ether hereticall or popisch to say, (\quod
electi debent esse certi de salute, sed non securi\) . And
likewise:
<P 105>
(\quod electi possunt cadere totaliter a fide ad tempus, sed non
finaliter\) .
   (\Tuus\) , Jo. Cantuar.
   To the moste Reverend ffather in God, my verie good Lord and
brother, the Archbishopp of Yorke his Grace.

<Q HUT 1596 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 105>
[} [\LETTER XLIX.\] CECYLL LORD BURGHLEY TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\March 6, 1595-6.\]
   May it please your Grace. Yesterdaye by my letters I
advertised my expectation to have hard from you of the receipt
of the Quene's commission; which I am now gladd to parceave, by
a letter syned by your Grace and the rest of the Quene's learned
Counsell there the first of this moneth, that the same
commission came to you the daye before: wherein I do note some
negligence of the poste, for I did entend it should have come
there some dayes before; but I am gladd that it served to hold
your sessions the first. By a private letter of your Grace, as
I thynk written at the same tyme (though the daye be not dated
by the negligence of your Secretary), I parceave you have made
sute for the comission ecclesiasticall 3 quarters of a yeare,
and that it nowe remayneth in Doctor Caesar's hand unsyned, whom
I will dyrect to procure it to be syned. Of other matters, which
I did impart unto you by my letter dated yesterday, I require
some answer. And so I bid your Grace verie hartie farewell. From
the Court at Richmond, the vi=th= of Marche, 1595.
   Your Grace's at com[{mand{] , 
   W. Burghley.
   I doubt not but the Receyvor of Yorkshire hath geven order
for the payment of money for the dyette, for that he had his
warrant both for that which was done in the Erl's tyme, and from
thence forward. But I take it that hir Majestie meaneth not to
be at charge with the Erl's howshold servauntes from the
<P 106>
tyme of this your commission, and so it is reason you should
give them warninge; and yett I pitty their estate, considering I
can fynd nobody to take care for the buryall of their master, as
yesterday I did write unto you, and yett I am desirous to hear
from you how the body of the nobleman is ordered, and where it
resteth, and what nomber they are, and of what condicion, that
attend the same.
   To the moste Reverend ffather in God, my varie good Lord, the
Archbishopp of York his Grace.

<Q HUT 1596 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 106>
[} [\LETTER L.\] CECYLL LORD BURGHLEY TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\April, 1596.\]
   After my verie commendacions to your Grace [\SIC\] , and to
the rest. I have received a letter of the xxiij=th= of this
monethe, signed by your Grace and some others of the Counsell,
wherebie yow certifie unto me that my Lord of Huntingdon hath
signified unto yow hir Majestie's pleisure towching the buryell
of the late Erl of Huntingdon's body at Ashbie in
Leicestershire, which I knowe to be true, and to be donne with
hir Majestie's verie good liking of the now Erl of Huntingdon,
for that he hath undertaken to performe the same; and for myne
owne parte, as I do thinke that it is verie honorablie donne of
my Lord, and the place verie fitt for the buryall, so I do
thinke it verie well donne of yow, M=r=. Puresye, and Mr.
Stanhopp, if yow take the paynes to repaire to Ashbie with such
of the late Erl's servaunts as may convenientlie traveil thither
to performe the last dutie of your love towards him. And whereas
I fynd by your letter that by reason of the greate nomber of the
late Erl's houshold servaunts, and longer contynuance of them
together then was thought, the expences have growen farr greater
then that which hath bene received from hir Majestie's Receyvour
by the warrant dyrected unto him, of the which yow require to
have allowance, and to
<P 107>
have order given for the payment thereof, that remboursement may
be made to the late Erl's steward, who hath disbursed a good
some of money for their dyett; I can make no other answer
hereunto but that I can not help the same otherwise then uppon
the ordinarye, and therfore do wishe that good husbandrie may be
used hereafter to repayre and recover the former expences. And,
as towching the place where the dyett shalbe provided for that
Counsell at their sitting, (which hitherto hath bene, as yow
write, in the minster garthe,) I am of opynion that it is more
convenient to be kept within hir Majestie's howse, the late
Erl's good being safelye lockd upp in some private place, as
your Grace writes; and therfore I do require your Grace that
order may be taken accordinglie. And, lastlie, towching your
Grace's private letter to me, wherein your Grace doth earnestlie
wishe and desire (for the reasons therein sett downe) that there
may be some fitt nobleman appointed by hir Majestie and sent
downe to be President and Liuetenant there, your Grace shall
understand that I do as earnestlie desire it as your Grace doth,
and will further it the best I can; but, by reason of my want of
healthe, can neither do it nor write unto your Grace as
frequentlie as otherwise I would do, wherein I pray your Grace
to hold me excused. And so I bidd your Grace verie hartely
farewell. From the Courte at Grenewiche, the [^BLANK IN
EDITION^] of April, 1596.
   Your Grace's verie lovinge frend,
   W. Burghley.
   To the most Reverend ffather in God, my verie good Lord, the
Archbishop of Yorke his Grace, and to the Counsell established
in the northe parts.

<Q HUT 1596 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 108>
[} [\LETTER LI.\] CECYLL LORD BURGHLEY TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\Maie 15, 1596.\]
   After my verie hartie commendacions to your Grace. As it hath
bene thought good and expedient that nowe, uppon the departure
of hir Majestie's royall navie at sea, under the conduct of the
Erl of Essex and H. Admirale, that some declaration should be
published in prynt to the world of the causes moving hir
Majestie thereunto, for the manifestation of the justnes of hir
procedinge; so I have thought good to send unto your Grace 3 of
them, 2 in Englishe and one in Latyn, both for your Grace's owne
satisfaction and for the better notifying the same unto that
countrie, who wilbe gladd to heare of it, and by your Grace's
report will quicklie and easilye be divulged thereaboute. And
so, not doubting but that our armye shall have your Grace's good
prayers to God for their good successe in this expedition
againste his professed ennemyse and ours, I bidd your Grace
verie hartely farewell. From the Court at Grenewich, the xv=th=
of Maye, 1596.
   Your Grace's verie assured lovinge frend,
   W. Burghley.
   (^For hir Majestie's spetiall affayres.^)
   To the moste Reverend Father in God, my verye good Lord, the
Archbishopp of Yorke his Grace.
   (^W. Burghley.^)
   15 May, '96, 8 at nighte.
   Hast, hast, post hast!

<Q HUT 1596 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 109>
[} [\LETTER LII.\] LORD BURGLEY TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF YORKE.}]
[^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\Maie 20, 1596.\]
   After my verie hartie commendacions to your Grace. I have
received your Grace's letter of the xv=th= of this monethe,
together with the coppie of Sir Chr. Hylliard's letter to yow
and that Counsell, inferinge that a certein Scottishman (as was
suspected), by the meanes of one Richard Beningham, a bad
fellowe, had taken into his shipp, lying nere the Spurne within
Humber, a C. quarters of beanes, which he meant to have stayd,
supposing he had no lycence to transport them; wherein what is
the trothe I knowe not. But this I thought good to lett your
Grace understand, that I have of late graunted severall warrants
for transportacion of a good round quantitie beanes and pease
into Scotland, whereof the greatest part was by hir Majestie's
lycence, graunted at the suite of the Scottishe Ambasseder now
residing here; a part also was graunted to one Hunter, a
Scottishman, in lieu of a lycence graunted to him above a yeare
past for the transportacion of v=c=. quarters of wheate, whereof
he never took any benefitt; and another part unto 2 merchaunts
of Hull, uppon good and reasonable cause, being recommended to
me from the Maior and Aldermen of that towne. Nevertheles your
Grace shall understand that I had not assented to any
transportacion at all, if I had not formerlie received letters
from the Maior, Aldermen, and Officers of the towne of Hull,
that there was not onlie greate plentie of that grayne there in
these parts, which might well be spared, and the prises at so
lowe a rate as it might be transported without any hurt to the
countrie, but also that there were many Scotts there that had
browght in good comodities, and had no other comoditie to
imploye their money in but in beanes and pease. I received also,
synce that time, a letter from diverse Justics of peace, both of
that countie, and Yorke, and Lincoln, as namelie, M=r=. Pellham,
M=r=. Hotham, M=r=. Skippwithe, M=r=. Gats, and M=r=. Alred,
agreing in report with the others towching the plentie of that
grayne and the lowe prises thereof, and that it would be a
benefitt to the
<P 110>
countrie and to the poore husbandmen thereaboute to have lycence
to transport the same; and this was the cause that moved me to
graunt the said warrants. Nevertheles I added a proviso, that,
uppon informacion that the prises of the said grayne should be
enhansed by reason of the said lycences, I would take order for
the staye of them. From my howse at Westminster, the xx=th= of
Maye, 1596.
   Your Grace's verie lovinge frend,
   W. Burghley.
   Postcript. - Towching the defects of beacons, pouder, piks,
etc., mencioned in the end of Sir Ch. Hylliard's letter, I
thinke the towne of Hull either are bound, or in reason ought,
to supplie them, in respect of the benefitt they receyve from
hir Majestie; I therfore pray your Grace send for some of them
(which yow shall think fitt) and deale with them to that end, or
otherwise lett me understand from yow your opynion by whom it is
fitt they should be supplied.
   To the moste Reverend Father in God, my verie good Lord, the
Archbishopp of Yorke his Grace.

<Q HUT 1596 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 111>
[} [\LETTER LIV.\] CECYLL LORD BURGHLEY TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\Aug. 2, 1596.\]
   Maie it please your Grace. By your late lettres I perceave
what a good Christian act yow have done in reducing of the
Popish priest Dawson from his errors, who, lewdlie denying the
authorities by your Grace alledged against him, in the end was
justlie convinced. And bycause no mention is made in your
lettres of his blind reasons for his defence, nor of your
assertions of authorities to disprove him, I am desirous to have
a report of them; both for my better informacion, wherein I pray
your Grace to satisfy me by your next writings; and likewise of
his manner of acknowledging his error, and profession of
amendement under his hand writing. I desire also to heare from
your Grace the particular aunswers made to such articles of
complaints as I did send unto yow, conteyning the greevances of
the country, against many proceedings of that Counsell; wherein
if yow have satisfyed the justices of assise, I am verie glad,
for I assure your Grace some of them made the like complaint to
mee. The good newes that are commonlie reported of the great
victorie of hir Majestie's army and navy in Spayne is so
certainlie confirmed by the generalls as it is ment that both in
the province of Canterbury and of yours at York there should be
publick prayer and thankesgiving
<P 112>
for the same, whereof your Grace shall shortlie heare. And so I
comend mee verie hartelie to your Grace. From the Court, the 2
of August, 1596.
   Your Grace's assured loving frend,
   W. Burghley.
   To the most Reverend Father in God, my veary good Lord, the
Archbishop's Grace of York.

<Q HUT 1597 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 112>
[} [\LETTER LV.\] CECYLL LORD BURGHLEY TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\30 Jan. 1596-7.\]
   May it please your Grace. I have by M=r=. Ferne recyved your
Grace's lettres of the 8=th= of this monethe, wherby you do
advertise me of lettres you have recyved from the Lord Keper of
the greate seale, whereby he sheweth a dislike that your Grace
and the Counsell should dyrect proces to staye suites commenced
in the Chauncerye; wherein you have written to his Lordship for
your defence that it hath bene so used by the Court in former
tymes. And hearein I have had some speache with M=r=. Ferne, and
have shewed my opynion that I thinke it against good reason,
that where a suite is begonne in the Chauncery by any plantife,
that he should be restrayned from following his suite at the
request of the defendant; which my conceipt hath moved me to
forbeare herein to deale with my Lord Keper. But if M=r=. Ferne
shall, as he saith he will, shewe me some presidente of the
yelding of the Chauncery to such request, I will theruppon deale
with my Lord Keper, having some coulour therby to presse the
same; otherwise I shalbe loath to deale, contrary to myne owne
opynion. I wish hir Majestie would provide you of some noble man
sufficient for authoritie and wisdome to be the president there
of that Counsell; but hir Majestie in this and like causes
delayeth her resolution for want, as is supposed, of mete
persons for such offices, wherof I am sory to see such
scarsitie, as is over apparant: yett I will not fayle to
<P 113>
sollicite hir Majestie to determyne hereuppon. And so, referring
the report of suche good newes as M=r=. Ferne can bring you of
an overthrow given by Count Morrice and other Englishe forces
comanded by Sir Robert Sidney and Sir Frauncis Vere of a nomber
of the King of Spayn's auncient soldiars, as the like hath not
happened with such successe to the states synce the begyning of
their warrs, I bidd your Grace verie hartely farewell. From the
Court at Whitehall, the xxx=th= of Jan. 1596.
   Your Grace's assuredly at command,
   W. Burghley.
   To the most Reverend Father in God, my verye good Lord, the
Archbishopp of Yorke his Grace.

<Q HUT 1597 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 113>
[} [\LETTER LVI.\] LETTER FROM ARCHBISHOP HUTTON TO LORD
BURGHLEY.}] [^TO WILLIAM CECIL^]
[\11 March, 1596-7.\]
   My most honorable good Lord, I have beene often times bold to
pray your good Lordship to move her Majestie for a Lord
President here. In your last letters you shewe as the cheffe
cause that her Highnes doth not resolve to be the great want off
fitt men for that place. I am right sorie to know so much
myself, (\sed in eo non sunt omnia\) ; but rather this is the
chefe cause, that, the ranke of nobilitie beinge taken away whom
her Majestie founde at the beginninge off her reigne, the
nobilitie that now is growinge up under her shee by her great
wisdome and experience doth know them (\intus et in cute\) ,
themselfes, their families, ther defects and informities
whatsoever: but, under reservation, this oght not to cause her
Majestie to be so irresolute; for, as Solomon saith, (\qui
observat ventum non seminabit, et qui considerat nubes non
metet\) . For I make no doubt but yf it please her Highnes to
resolve, her Majestie's commission, the instructions, the
ordinarie proceedings in this court knowen to
<P 114>
the learned Counsell here, will sufficientlie inhable him. My
Lord of Huntingdon when he came downe here was verie raw, but
havinge a resolute wit to serve God and her Majestie, he grewe
to great experience; so, no dowte, yf her Majestie resolve off
anie that feareth God and loveth the present state, God will
inhable him. Thus, beseeching God to blesse her Majestie and the
whole realme with your Lordship's long life and good health, I
humblie take my leave. March 11, 1596.
   Post Script. - I pray you to be a mean that there be no
amovation in the office of the examiners here, and vouchsafe
this bearer, M=r=. Cole, your Lordship's favour.

<Q HUT 1597 RCECIL>
<A ROBERT CECIL>
<G M>
<P 114>
[} [\LETTER LVII.\] SIR ROB. CECYLL TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\March 18, 1596-7.\]
   My good Lorde, I have made knowen to her Majestie with what
willingnes you have performed to my brother-in-lawe what
formerly you had promised to her Majestie, and howe in every
circumstance you have shewed bothe regarde to her pleasure and
affection to the persone recommended. I am commanded for this to
be the messenger of her Majestie's gratious acceptation, as a
thinge exceedinglie pleasinge her, the rather for that by your
voluntarie and speedie performance her Majestie had present
opportunitie, thoughe in a trifle, to give comfort to the younge
gentleman in the instant of his great losses of his best and
dearest frendes; wherin as I confesse my spirit and body dothe
participate with a feelinge ( (\secundum naturam\) )
insupportable, so do I confesse myself interessed in an
exceeding obligation of gratefulnes to you, as being done to him
whom for his neernes in bloodd and vertue to my deare wief I can
but hold in principall accoumpt; the requittall wherof I shall
make good to you whensoever opportunitie shall afforde me
occasion. And so for this tyme
<P 115>
I take my leave. From the Court, this xviij=th= of Marche, 1596.
   Your Grace's poore frende at command, 
   Ro. Cecyll.
   To the most Reverend Father in God, my very good Lorde, the
Lorde Archbushoppe of Yorke his Grace.

<Q HUT 1597 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 115>
[} [\LETTER LVIII.\] LORD BURGHLEY TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF YORKE
AND THE COUNCILL THERE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\March 19, 1596-7.\]
   After my vearie hartie commendacions to your Grace and the
rest. I have received your letters written the xi=th= of this
monethe, mentioninge the apprehencion of one Joseph Constable, a
brother of Sir Henry Constable's, with some others with him,
beinge, as it semeth, common receivers of seminaries and such
like bad persons; movinge mee by the same your letter to direct
youe mine opinion in what corse and with what speed yow should
proceade against the said Constable; whearein I cannot direct
youe aniethinge, but must leave the same to your selves: onelie
I have thowght good to lett youe understand, that uppon the
dowbt conceived by you, Mr. Ferne, of the validitie of his
inditement, I have, in the absence of the judges, required the
opinion of hir Majestie's attorney-generall; whose awnsweare yow
shall perceive by his letter to mee, which I doe send heare
inclosed to yow, with the copie of his inditement, by which yow
will finde the same to be erronious. And wheare yowe require to
understand mine opinion for his sendinge upp, I see noe such
cawse to have him to be sent hither. And so
<P 116>
I bid your Grace and the rest hartelie farewell. From my howse
in the Strand, this xix=th= of Marche, 1596.
   Your Grace's assured lovinge frend,
   W. Burghley.
   Your Grace's letter to me, shewyng your desyre and opinion
for a President, hath bene greatly lyked by hir Majesty for your
syncere advice.
   To the most Reverend Father in God, my verie good Lord, the
Archbishop of Yorke, and the rest of the Counsell there.

<Q HUT 1597 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 117>
[} [\LETTER LX.\] WHYTGYFT, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, [\TO THE
ARCHBISHOP OF YORK.\] }] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\2 May, 1597.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) It hath pleased her Majesty to
bestowe the bishoprick of London upon D=r=. Bancroft; the
bishoprick of Winchester upon D=r=. Bilson, Bishop of Worcester;
and the bishoprick of Chester upon D=r=. Vaughan, now Bishop of
Bangor. And, forasmuch as it would be verye great trouble and
charges to him to come or send downe for his confirmation there,
he hath intreated mee to move you to be content to direct your
commission to some here for the perfourming of the same; which
you may very well doe to some of the doctors of the Arches,
suche as you shall best lyke of. The bishoprick is but small,
and your Lordship knoweth that after his confirmation he must
doe his homage here in person, and take care for his
restitution; and therefore I hartelye praye yow to showe unto
him what favor you may.
   The last lettres written from your selfe and the Councell
there, touching certeyn papists and recusants, are very well
taken, and you are lyke to receave thancks for the same,
especiallie for your paynes in conference with some of them to
so good an effect. In one of the lettres there was putt
Christes-tyde for Christen-mass, which because of the noveltie
thereof (being latelye used onely by some nice persons more
curiouse in termes then in deeds) was by some of your best
frends mislyked; and I marvell how it escaped you, being so
farre from allowing suche novelties. Our brother, your
successor, hath scarcelye delt brotherlie with mee in some
lettres latelye written concerning Tempest's wiffe and Hedleyes
of Newcastle; but of suche dealings I make small accompte. I
have no especiall newes to write unto you. Rumors and reportes
varie
<P 118>
daylie. (\Vale in Christo!\) At Lambeth, the second of May,
1597.
   Your Grace's assured loving frend and brother,
   Jo. Cantuar.
   To the moste Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord and
brother, the Archbishoppe of Yorke his Grace.

<Q HUT 1598 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 120>
[} [\LETTER LXIII.\] LORD TREASURER [\BURGHLEY TO THE ARCHBISHOP
OF YORK).\] }] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\21 Feb. 1597-8.\]
   After my vearie hartie commendacions to your Grace. The same
shall understand that at the present theare is, by order of the
King of Scottes, the person of Sir Robert Carre, otherwise
<P 121>
called the Lord of Sesford, Warden of the Est Marches of
Scotland, delivered to the Warden of the Est Marches of England,
for aunswearinge of divers attempts and wrongs done by the part
of Scotland; whoe is to remaine in England untill a nomber of
pledges maie be delivered into England for satisfaccion of the
wronges done to England in that wardenrie. This man is of great
accompt both by his birthe and by office, and one hable to be
either a good or a bad neighbour to England: for which purpose
hir Majestie hath thowght it necessarie that he should be
browght and staid in som remote part in England from the Border;
and for that purpose hir Majestie hath recommended me to
signifie to your Grace hir pleisance and command that he should
be browght unto you; and that he should be committed to the
charge of sum trustie persons, to see him forthcominge at your
howse of Busshopsthrope, or sum othir place owt of the citie of
York, so as he showld not have anie accesse of strangers to him.
And, accordinge to this hir Majestie's commandment, I have at
this present signified hir Majestie's pleasance to Sir Robert
Careie, Warden of the Estmarche, whoe hath him in his custodie
at this time, and will send him to your Grace. And so I take my
leave. From the Cort, this xxi of Februarye, 1597.
   Your Grace's assured lovinge frende,
   W. Burghley.
   To the most Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord, the
Archbishop of York.

<Q HUT 1598 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 121>
[} [\LETTER LXIV.\] LORD TREASORER [\BURGHLEY TO THE ARCHBISHOP
OF YORK).\] }] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\1 Mar. 1597-8.\]
   After my vearie hartie commendacions to your Grace. I have
received your letter, dated the xxv=th= daie of the last moneth,
<P 122>
signifieng thereby the receipt of mine of the xxj=th=, whearebie
I gave your Grace to understand of hir Majestie's purpose to
have the Lord of Sesford to be sent unto yowe, to be safelie
kept at Busshopsthorp, or some other place without the citie.
And wheare by this you lettre yowe move three questions, I will
in one word awnswere them all, which is, that hir Majestie's
express pleisure and commaundment is that he shall not be
browght at all to Yorke, or kept at hir Majestie's howse theare;
but that he showld be kept at Bishopsthrop, and theare to be
kept as a close prisoner, without resort to him, or walking
abroade, otherwise then privately neare the howse; and
thearefore I doe not dowbt but, nowe your Grace understandeth
hir Majestie's pleisure therein, yowe will be carefull to tak
order with him accordingly, and that he maie be safelie garded
and kept. And so I commend mee hartelie to your Grace. From
Cort, this first of Marche, 1597.
   Your Grace's assured loving frend,
   W. Burghley.
   To the most Reverend Father in God, my veary good Lord, the
Archbishop's Grace of Yorke.

<Q HUT 1598 PBERTIE>
<A PEREGRINE BERTIE>
<G M>
<P 128>
[} [\LETTER LXX.\] LORD WILLUGHBIE [\TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF
YORK).\] }] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\4 May, 1598.\]
   My very goode Lord, I receaved the Queene's Majestie's
packett and your Grace's letter this fourth of May about six in
the morning, and by her Highnes' letters had the very like
directions as it seemed by your Grace's to me you had concerning
the delivery of Sir Robert Kerr Lord Sesforde, and upon the same
conditions. But, before the coming of these letters, there was
nother man nor mention of any thing touching the same, more then
a secretary of his came to me to have pasport to ryde to your
Grace and informe his master that his pledges were ready; which
when I had graunted him, he left the same behynde him, and so
departed. It seemeth that her Majestie's plesure is, before
Sesford should be inlarged, there should be putt into my handes
the brother of the said Sesford, with two persons of kynn to
him, to remayne prisoners in some suche place as shalbe
appoynted thereunto, untill these pledges that ar to be given in
by the indent of the late Commissioners on both sydes for the
border causes shalbe accordingly entered; and with this caution
also before he be dismissed from your Lordship, that he gyve in
writing under his hand and seale, that if, after his brother and
kinsfolkes shalbe delivered into my handes, he doe not within
one moneth next after following recover and deliver in those
pledges which by the said Commissioners' indent ought on his
part to be entered, he shall then return to Barwick and yeald
himself prisoner into my handes, to be kept in such places of
these north partes as to her Majestie shalbe thought fitt,
untill he shall have performed on his part that which by the
sayd indent was agreed should be done. Wherfore it may please
your Grace to deale effectually with Sir R. Kerr Lord Sesford,
to take order to proceade herin according to her Majestye's
pleasure; and, assone as ever his brother and kinsfolkes
<P 129>
apoynted shalbe delivered into my handes, I shall send your
Grace present word, and thinck it very convenient that then you
send him to Duresme by such gentlemen of your choyse of that
country (myself being altogether unacquaynted in those partes)
as you shall thinke meete, acording to your Grace's owne project
in your postscript. And I would willingly entreat you to give me
your opinion what manner of persons were fitt to be sent from me
for his receaving there, whether martiall men for a guard, or
civill politique men for entring into his counsell; whether
many, or fewe; with great countenance, or with ordinary
complement; for in these things I would be glad nether to doe
too much nor too little, but, as I have direction by mutuall
correspondency with your Lordship, that which might be most
acceptable service. And so I humbly take my leave. From Barwick,
the 4=th= of May, 1598.
   Your Grace's assured,
   P. Wyllughby.
   To the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of
Yorke his Grace.

<Q HUT 1598 PBERTIE>
<A PEREGRINE BERTIE>
<G M>
<P 129>
[} [\LETTER LXXI.\] LORD WILLUGHBIE [\TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF
YORK).\] }] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\8 May, 1598.\]
   My honorable good Lord, I receaved your Grace's letter this
day at noone, in conveyance whereof the postes have used great
negligence, it coming to Duresme at eight in the morning, and to
Newcastle not till foure in the evening: to punish this slacknes
(least it be committed in more important services), I must
desyre your Lordship to concurr with me. I am of your Grace's
opinion that Sir Robert Kerr will not make any escape, yet much
water passeth the mill that the
<P 130>
miller knoweth not, and there may be secretes herin unknown to
your Lordship and me; so that, till his pledges be delivered, it
wilbe good to have a heedefull eye to him. And wishing your
Lordship much hapines, I rest
   Your Grace's assured,
   P. Wyllughby.
   Barwick, the viij=th= of May, 1598.
   Since my letter written, Sir R. Kerr's pledges arrived here
at foure afternoone. I must desyre your Grace to advertise me
two dayes before he comes to Duresme, that I may take order with
those who I shall apoynt to meete him.
   To the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop's
Grace of Yorke.

<Q HUT 1598 PBERTIE>
<A PEREGRINE BERTIE>
<G M>
<P 130>
[} [\LETTER LXXII.\] LORD WILLOUGHBY TO THE LORD OF SESFORDE.}]
[^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\8 May, 1598.\]
   Sir, I would have bene glad to have seene you in your retorn
in this towne; but, her Majestye havinge otherwyse appoynted
your jurney, I wyll, yf I cann, mete you at M=r=. Graye's, and
purpose to send some gentleman to convey you from Durham
thether. I am sory I shall not intertaigne your brother and
hostages, beinge unfurnished as a stranger yet my selfe, but
what I may shalbe afforded them; hopinge you wyll hasten to
deliver the pledges accordinge to the indent for ther
releivinge. Thus, wishinge you well in any thinge becomes me, I
rest accordingly,
   Your lovinge freind to my uttermoste,
   P. Wyllughby.
   Barwick, this 8=th= of May.
   To the Honorable Knight, Sir Robert Carre, Lord Warden of the
Easte Marshes of Scottlande.

<Q HUT 1598 PBERTIE>
<A PEREGRINE BERTIE>
<G M>
<P 131>
[} [\LETTER LXXIII.\] LORD WILUGHBIE [\TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF
YORK).\] }] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\13 May, 1598.\]
   I am sure, howsoever I measurd by the cold clime Aprill for
a late May, or missed to signe my name, I omitted it not for
want of grace, but for hast; which shall be at layzure mended.
The hand as I take it was, as this, my owne, and therefore my
owne, and not my secretarie's fault; and I confesse I love to
write no dobles of letters, but will affirm my hand and it
whansoever your Grace shall nede to call uppon it. In the meane
season, as the French pronouncing Latin shorten it mutch, and
with their quickness excuse the cadence of sillables, so
excusing my selfe, and leaving it to your gratious construction,
I rest in better things at your Grace's commawnd,
   P. Wyllughby.
   Barwick, the 13 of May.
   The poste-masters have in this pacquet of your Grace's
slacked their duty mutch; I complayne, but I shall be better
hard when the witnes is (\ex ore duorum\) . If your Grace send
me the letter as it is, I will set to my hand: I can hardly
beleave but that I signed the letter; but, if it be not signed,
at any time I will subscribe it for you. My people shall attend
at Durham according to your Grace's appoint.
   To the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop's
Grace of Yorke.

<Q HUT 1598 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 133>
[} [\LETTER LXXV.\] LORD TREASORER [\BURGHLEY TO THE ARCHBISHOP
OF YORK\] .}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\23 May, 1598.\]
   After my vearie hartie commendacions to your Grace. Wheare by
your letter dated the xv=th= daie of this moneth, derected to
myself and my Lord Marshall, yowe require to understand what
yowe shall doe with the bond which yowe have taken of the Lord
of Sessford, (whereof yowe sent hither a copie,) as either to
send it hither, or to the Lord Willowghbie; your Grace shall
understaund that it is ment that your Grace should send it to
the Lord Willowghbie, so as it maie be delivered back uppon the
performance of the condicion thereof; and thearefore I praie
your Grace forthwith to send it to his Lordship. And so I
recommend mee heartelie to your Grace. From the Cort, this xxiii
of Maye, 1598.
   Your Grace's assured loving frend,
   W. Burghley.
   To the most Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord, the
Archbishop's Grace of Yorke.

<Q HUT 1598 TMATTHEW>
<A TOBIE MATTHEW>
<G M>
<P 136>
[} [\LETTER LXXIX.\] MY LORD OF DURESME [\DR. MATTHEW\] .}] [^TO
DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\17 June, 1598.\]
   May it please your Grace and the rest. Finding by letters
from the Lords and others of her Majestie's most honorable Prevy
Counsell that the pledges lately delivered by Sir Robert
<P 137>
Kerr to the Lord Governor of Barwick are thence to be conveyed
and guarded to York; and by a letter from M=r=. William Fenwick,
the Deputie Warden of the Middle Marshes, that he is to recceave
them upon Mondaie next about noone at Alnewick; at whose hand
the Sherif of this countie is to receave them at Gatesheade on
Tuesdaie next about the same houre, and purposeth to deliver
them to the Sherif of Yorkshire at Croftbridge upon Wednesdaie
next by one of the clock in the afternoone, being the usuall
place betwene that countie and this to deliver and receave all
maner of prisoners (\hinc inde\) : These may be to certifie your
Grace of the premisses, to the end that the said tyme and place
may forthwith be signified to the Sherif of Yorkshire, whereby
he may addresse himself for the more certayne execution, with
expedition, of this her Majestie's extraordinary service of
great importaunce; wherewith I perceave your Grace and your
associats have been made acquainted already from above. And so I
humbly betake your Grace and the rest of that honorable Counsell
to the tuition of the Almightie. At B. Awkland, this xvij=th= of
June, 1598.
   Your Grace's humblie at commaundment,
   Tobie Duresm.
   To the most Reverende ffather in God, and my very good Lord,
the Archebusshop's Grace of York, and the rest of her Majestie's
Counsell established there.

<Q HUT 1598 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 143>
[} [\LETTER LXXXV.\] THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK TO TIMOTHY HUTTON,
HIS SON.}] 
[\16 Aug. 1598.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I am glad to heare that you and your
wife bend and buckle your selves so well towards thryvinge. God
blesse you bothe, and yours, and geve yow much comfort of them.
Yow are put in the commission of peace within the Northridinge,
and I referr it unto your choice, whether you will come to take
th' oath before the judges at th' assises, or afterwardes. There
are so few justices in that part of the countrie that I feare
there will be some resorte unto yow, which in this tyme of th'
infection may be daingerous. Commend me to my daughter, and move
hir to continue as she hath well begunne to hir comforte and
commendation. And so I commend yow bothe to the blessed
direction of the best Director. At Yorke, the xvj=th= of August,
1598.
   Your loving father,
   Matth. Ebor.
   [\POSTSCRIPT.\] More safetie not to coome, but more present
credit to come, and be sworne openlie: (\utere tuo juditio\) .
Yf you coome, you shalbe welcome; yf you come not, I will not
take it in evill part. (\Vale in Domino!\)
   (\Tuus ut suus,\)
   Matth. Ebor.
   To my lovinge sonne, Timithie Hutton, at Marske.

<Q HUT 1599 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 145>
[} [\LETTER LXXXVII.\] THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORKE TO TIMOTHY
HUTTON.}] 
[\25 Feb. 1598-9.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I thank yow for your letter, and I
pray yow thanke M=r=. Lawson hartely, and tell him I am not
hable to deale with all these thinges; notwithstanding, if the
milnes be fitt for your house, I would be glad to serve my
frends. It is not like they be of that worth which he settes
downe, because there be other milnes in the towne; yet if yow
understand certainely the worth, the value, the tenure, the
reparations, and the price, I will tell you more. Thus,
beseachinge God to blesse yow and youres with his manifold
graces, I bid yow hartelie farewell. From Yorke, in haste,
Februar. 25, 1598.
   Your loving father,
   Matth. Ebor.
   To my lovinge sonne, Timothie Hutton, at Marske, with speede.

<Q HUT 1599 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 147>
[} [\LETTER LXXXIX.\] LETTER FROM ARCHBISHOP WHITGIFT TO
ARCHBISHOP HUTTON.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\27 Aug. 1599.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) Wee here have the like writts frome
the Exchequer to certifie, as wee are also bownde to doe by the
commission ytself. The bonds wee take wee dulie certifie into
the Exchequer, when they are forfayted; nether can wee otherwise
bestowe or imploy them. Owte of the fines wee defray necessarie
charges, which are nott greate; the rest we return also into the
Exchequer; but owre fines are nott greate nor manie. Towching
your self, I have not at anie time hard her Majestie to have
apprehended anie complaintes against you, or to have conceaved
otherwise then well of you; but here hathe bene informations
gyven that recusants are of late increased in that province, and
that you are to milde with them. Some of your ministers doe also
affirme the same to be trewe. My advice therefore ys, that your
Lordship make a true declaration in writing how that province
standeth in that poynte and this tyme; for it may be some men's
pollicie to make things worse then they are, to effect there
desyers and to winn the commendation to themselfes. Assuer
yourself that I will do my best to satisfye all objections, yf
anie shalbe, especiallie so far as I knowe and shalbe
instructed. I can testifie, with manie others, how desirious you
were to leave that troublesome place of government, whereof in
my opinion you are happilie rydd. You cannot but here what
alarams we have had, and yet have, of the Spanyerds approching.
It hath bene, and ys, a greate charges to the clergie of this
province: you and your clergie are not trowbled therewith. And
so, with my verie hartie commendations, I committ you to the
tuition of Allmightie God. Frome Croidon, the 27 of Aug. 1599.
   Your Grace's assuered loving frend and brother,
   Jo. Cantuar.
   To the most Reverend in Christe, my verie good Lord and
brother, the Lord Archbishopp of York his Grace.

<Q HUT 1599 RCECIL>
<A ROBERT CECIL>
<G M>
<P 149>
[} [\LETTER XCI.\] SIR ROB. CECYLL TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF
YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\December 26, 1599.\]
   After my very harty commendacions to your Grace. Where her
Majestie hath ben informed of the deathe of M=r=. Do. Binge, who
in his liefe tyme enioyed a prebend in this churche, which nowe
is become voyde by that accydent; fforsomuch as it pleased her
Majestie to use her recommendacion unto your Grace for a lease
to be made to my brother-in-lawe M=r=. George Brooke, whereunto
you dyd not assent, but in lieu thereof you made hym a graunt of
the next prebend that should fall voyd and be in your Grace's
dysposycion, I have thought good to let you knowe that her
Majestie (uppon this occasion) dothe expect from you a
confyrmacion of that which you have begonne and intended towerds
the gentleman, being one of whom her Majestie maketh
extraordynary estymacion, bothe in regard of the affeccion which
she hathe heretofore borne to his parents, and the partyculer
quallities and good partes wherwith himself is quallyfyed. Thes
being all I have to wryte unto your Grace for the present, I
take my leave. From the Cort at Richmond, the xxvj=th= of
Decem., 1599.
   Your Grace's very loving and assured freind,
   Ro. Cecyll.
   To the most Reverent ffather in God, my very good Lord, the
Lord Archbishopp of York's Grace.

<Q HUT 1600 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 153>
[} [\LETTER XCVI.\] A LETTER FROM THE LORD ARCHBYSHOP OF YORKE
TO THE LORD ARCHBYSHOP OF CANTERBURIE.}] [^TO JOHN WHITGIFT^]
[\Maie 20, 1600.\]
   (\Salutem in Aucthore salutis!\) I am verie sorie that, after
so manie yeres of moste wise and happie government, manifest
displeasures appear among so worthie Counsellors. God grant it 
<P 154>
be not a prognostication of some great storme to this noble
kingdome.
   Three thinges there be which threaten daingers, if not ruine,
to Commonweals, (\privatum commodum, latens odium, juvenile
consilium\) .
   The first perverteth justice and upright dealing.
   The second seeketh revenge, though it be with dainger: (\Haec
ipsa pollens inclyti Pelopis domus ruat vel in me, dummodo in
fratrem ruat.\)
   The third, by not forecasting future events, hathe through
temerity turned manie States, - (\Cedo, qui` vestram rempublicam
tantam amisistis tam cito? respondentur alia, e`t haec in
primis, Proveniebant oratores novi, &c. stulti adolescentuli,\)
- especially when these three doe concurr together, and that in
the fullness of time when God hath appointed to alter states,
and when the sinne of the people is ripe. The palme of the hand
that writt on the wall (^Mene^) and (^Tekel^) , added also
(^Phares^) ; because, whensoever the fulnes of time and repenes
of sinne doe meete together, then doeth God exequute his
judgement upon kingdomes, as he did then, &c. The two first of
these are knowne onelie to God. The third, when it cometh, is
like to be knowne, seene, and felt to manie. We loke to the
second causes, and by them guess (\de futuris contingentibus\) ,
as, (\concordia res parvae crescunt, discordia maximae
dilabuntur\) . I praie God the jarring at home doe not incorage
the rebelles in Ireland and elsewhere. I take it to be against
good policy for a great prince to keepe a longe and lingeringe
warr with a subject nation, though the people be never so base;
for it teacheth them to be skilfull, stout, and resolute, as
appeareth by the Low Countries. God graunt it may not appeare by
Ireland! The people there are growne verie valiant and
desperate, and, being hable to abide all kind of hardines, take
the benefite of the contrie, of woods and bogges, and are like
to hould out a long time, without the losse of more noblemen and
captaines then may be well spared in England. Besides that,
manie of our English nation ( (\nescio quomodo\) ) are verie
unwilling to go thither; and many tall men at home, when they
come there, prove cowards, and the verie contry consumeth them.
Therefore (in myne opinion) it were not amisse for yow of hir
Majestie's Counsell to thinke rather of an honorable peace, than
<P 155>
to indainger so manie noblemen, valiant captaines, and dutifull
subjects, and perhaps (in time) the losse of that kingdome. Yow
and I are men of peace, and therefore I am bould to write unto
yow, being nere to hir Majestie, &c. It would comfort a verie
great nombre of hir Majestie's best subjects if shee would be
pleased to stretch forthe the goulden scepter to that noble
gentleman now abiding the frownes of fortune, and to cause a
sure and hartie reconciliation. The parties are verie wise and
most worthie Counsellors. They are raised almoste wholly by hir
Majestie, therefore (no doubt) wilbe ruled willingly; and shee
hathe bene moste gratious unto bothe parties, therefore may and
should rule and overrule bothe parties. Hir Majestie, by long
experience, hathe gotten the verie (\habitum\) of deepe and
sound wisdome, and all heroicall vertues; so that I make no
doubt but that shee will, of hir owne inclynation, shew
clemencie and mercy, &c. The Lord for his mercies' sake blesse
this land with hir Majestie's long and prosperous reigne, and
yow also, that yow may long serve hir, to the good of his
Church. From Cawood, the xx=th= of Maie, 1600.
   Your Grace's in Christe most assured,
   Matth. Ebor.

<Q HUT 1600 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 155>
[} [\LETTER XCVII.\] THE LORD OF CANTERBURY'S LETTER TO MY
LORD'S GRACE OF YORK.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\7=o= Junii 1600.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I have receaved both your letters;
that by your sonne-in-lawe M=r=. Bowes, and the other of the
xxv=th= of May. I would to God your Grace's advise and desier in
the first might take place, as I hope it will, there appearing
no evident token to the contrary. I have perused the copie of
the letter which you writt to the noble man, and his answere;
wherein I note the spirite of suche humours as those are
possessed witheall to whom (as it is thought) hee doeth too 
<P 156>
muche inclyne. (\Scientia non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem.\)
A man had better take upon him to perswade xx=ty= learned men
that are not (\propositi defensores\) , then one suche. I have
receaved the copie of a sermon preached there in the defense (as
it seemeth) of the haling of your recusantes to sermons; but his
name I knowe not. Hee alleageth both scriptures and doctors; but
nothing to the purpose in myne opinion. You knowe that Christe's
(\compelle intrare\) , and suche like phrases in the Newe
Testament, are farre from meaning of any suche violence. And so
is St. Augustine's (\si terrerentur et non docerentur\) , and
the rest of the places of his and others the doctors alleaged in
that sermon. True it is (as you knowe) that St. Augustine and
others doo allowe, in suche cases, ponishment and compulsion;
but not in that sorte. Neither did I ever reade that any
Christian prince or magistrate drewe any ethnickes or heretikes
either to preaching or praying; nor to my remembraunce was it
used in Queen Marie's tyme to the professors of the Gospell: but
I reade that heathenish princes have in that maner drawen
Christians to their sacrifices. But everie man aboundes in his
owne sense. Yf good come of it, it is well, and they have to
glorie in their dooinge; yf otherwise, then experience, which is
(\stultorum magistra\) , will teach them to see their owne
error. In the meane tyme I would not wish your Lordship to
contend with them in that matter, least they say that zeale is
quenched in you, and that you doate in your old age, as it
pleaseth some here to say of mee; and yet, peradventure, when
wee are gone, they will wish us alyve agayne. I am here verie
much troubled with the appeasing of newe controversies about
praedestination, justification, (\liberum arbitrium\) , the
state of the Fathers before the coming of Christe, inhaerent
justice, and suche like matters, never doubted of by any
professor of the Gospell during all the tyme of your aboade and
myne in the universitie. But suche is the malice of the devil,
and pryde of men glorieng in their owne wittes. My Lord of
London is not yet retourned from Embden, neither have I heard
from him but once since their arryval there. Upon Thurseday last
the Earle of Essex was called before the Lords of the Counsile,
and diverse others appointed by her Majesty to sitt with us, for
the hearing of the cause; as, the
<P 157>
Erles of Shrewesburie, Worcestre, Comberland, and Huntington;
the Lordes Zouche and Darcie; the Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, the Lord Chief Baron, Justice Gawdie, and Justice
Walmesley: the totall number of Counsellors and others were
xviij. The place of sitting was at the Lord Keeper's in York
house, where wee sate from viij of the clock in the morning till
it was almost ix at night, without ether eating, drinking, or
rysing. The Earle was charged by the Queene's learned Counseile,
who objected against him and urged v thinges especially, viz.:
the placing of the Earle of Southampton lieutenant of the
horsse, against her Majestie's commaundement; the making of so
many knightes, contrarie to her pleasure likewise; the not going
into the North partes against the rebell while our forces were
strong, according to the direction geven him here before hee
went and his owne consent, and contrarie to directions sent him
from hence after his arryvall in Ireland, &c.; his parleeing
with the rebell, &c.; and his coming over from thense, against
the Queene's expresse commaundement. The Earle aunswered with
great submission, and, after a vehement protestation of his
loyaltie and true harte to the Queene and the State, hee
confessed his error in all theis poyntes, and did forbeare to
make any qualifieng of them, or to contest with her Majesty
touching the same; saving in some particulars, wherein the Lords
were desierouse to bee satisfied. Hereupon wee proceeded to
judgement, every man gevinge his censure particularly from the
first to the last; and all agreed in this sentence, that my Lord
should retourne to his owne house, from whence he came, and
there remayne as he did beefore, during her Majestie's pleasure;
that hee should deale no more in matters of Counseile, nor take
himself to bee a Counseiler; that hee should not meddle himself
in causes belonging to the Earle Marshall, nor in the office of
Master of the Ordinaunce. And this was the end of that action.
You may think yourself beholden unto mee for writing so long a
letter, having so litle leasure; but I thought you were
desierouse to have myne opinion in the first, and to knowe the
trueth in the latter. My Lorde's frendes doo hope that this her
Majestie's mylde and mercifull proceeding with him will in
shorte tyme work his further good, according to her accustomed
clemencie, wh[{erein{]
<P 158>
she doeth excell. (\Vale in Christo!\) From Lambehith, the
vij=th= of June, 1600.
   (\Tuus in Christo,\)
   Jo. Cantuar.
   To [{...{] rend in Ch[{...{] he good Lorde [{...{] brother,
the Archebishopp of York his Grace.

<Q HUT 1600 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 160>
[} [\LETTER XCIX.\] MY LORD'S GRACE HYS LETTER [\TO TIMOTHY
HUTTON, HIS SON.\] }] 
[\Octob. 2, 1600\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I like your letter, but I doe feare
your brother will prove a carelesse unthrefft. My Lord Latimer
claimeth the milnes at Richmonde. I pray you talke with old
M=r=. Pepper, whose father boght the milnes off M=r=. John
Philips, and learne off him off whom M=r=. Philips did buie
them, and off whom that man did buie them, and so upward as
longe before as you can; and also what title my Lord Latimer
maketh unto them an the others milnes there, and he reporteth
the M=r=. Lawson hath compounded with him, and did offer unto me
to compounde, &c., for the land in Wensdale ... and Marske
latelie purchased. I thinke the Quene's auditor wilbe desyrous
to see your purchase, &c.; they cost me vij=c= and lx=li=. I
must have xx wethers everie Easter, untill I can make better
provision. Your sonne is well, God be thanked, and this day in
the minster garthe off his owne accord did aske Jackson howe his
grandsier did. Commend me to my doghter and to yours also.
Yorke, the 2 off October, 1600.
   Your lovinge father,
   Matth. Ebor.

<Q HUT 1602 JWHITGIFT>
<A JOHN WHITGIFT>
<G M>
<P 162>
[} [\LETTER CII.\] MY LORD OF CANTERBURIE'S LETTER TO MY LORD'S
GRACE OF YORKE.}] [^TO DR. MATTHEW HUTTON^]
[\17 May, 1602.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I had speach of late with the Lord
Burghley towching your self. His Lordship did gyve verie good
<P 163>
testimonie of you, onelie he fownde hymself discontented that
you seme to estrange your self frome hym by absenting your self
from York when he is there, saying that your praesens sometymes
there wold do much good; he wished also that you wold take
paynes now and then to here causes your self, and not to committ
them wholie to your other officers. Your Grace knoweth how
althings prosper where there is concorde, and what effects the
same dothe work bothe in Church and civill government; and
therefore I do wisch and assuer my self that you will have an
especiall care thereof. (\Vis unita fortior.\) My Lord semethe
to be of a good nature, and I know that you were never delited
with separation; and therefore, in my pore opinion, you shal do
well to conferr with hym and to be reconciled. I know that he
for hys parte will willinglie embrace yt, and yt can not be but
a great comforth to you; besides, that both God and her Majestie
shal by that meanes be better served. This I write of my self
unto you, bycause I wold lett you understand in what state
things are. As for hearing of matters your self with others in
commission with you, I shal not nede to write of; I am suer you
do so, and thingk yt to be necessarie for you so to doe. Her
Majestie hath bestowed the denerie of Powle's upon D=r=.
Overall, reader of the divinitie lecter in Chambridge and M=r=.
of Kateren-hall; and the denerie of Chester upon D=r=. Barloe.
The bishopprick of Hereford hangeth as yet in suspence betwixt
the Bishop of Chester and D=r=. Bennet, Dene of Windsor. (\Vale
in Christo!\) Frome Lamb. the 17 of May, 1602.
   Your Grace's loving frend and brother,
   Jo. Cantuar.
   To the most Reverend in Christ, my verie good Lord and
brother, the Archbishop of Yorke.

<Q HUT 1602 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 164>
[} [\LETTER CIII.\] MY LORD'S GRACE HYS APOLOGIE TO THE LORDS
CONCERNING PRECEDENCIE.}]
[\Maie 30, 1602.\]
   Right Honorable, It may please you to understand that the
xx=th= of this moneth I received a letter from your Honors of
the ix=th= of the same, which I did reade with griefe, that you
should conceive so hard an opinion of me as to censure me that I
have neglected your Honors' directions in my certificate
concerning place of the Vice-President at the Assizes, &c.; and
it would have greeved me more, but that I have the testimony of
a good conscience. I beseach yow therefore to heare my answere
with favorable construction.
   (\Objectio 1.\) - First, it is misliked that I did certifie
alone apart, without Sir Thomas Fairfax, Sir Edward Stanhope,
and M=r=. Atturney of the Wards; which three, or two of them,
should have joined with me.
   (\Respons. a.\) - I answere, (^ffirst^) , that (under
reformation) there is no such direction in your letters that I
should joyne them in my certificate. I appeall to your Honors
better informed, and referr my self to your later letter,
wherein brefely and most truely is recited the effect and
meaning of the former letter, viz., that I should use the
assistance and advise of Sir Thomas Fairfax, Sir Edward
Stanhope, and M=r=. Atturney of the Wardes, or any two of them,
and all convenient means, to informe my self what place the
Vice-President had by the space of 25 or 30 yeres, &c., and to
advertise your Honors; and, if my health did not serve me, then
to put it over to those three gentlemen or two of them, and they
to advertise yow, &c. Here is, that I should use their advise
and assistance to discover the trueth (as in deede I did), but
not to joine in certificate with them.
   (^b. Secondly.^) - If I had bene required so to doe, yet
could I not have any two of them to joine with me in
certificate: for, before the Judges came to Yorke, M=r=.
Atturney departed, and not yet retourned; Sir Thomas Fairfax
also went away before I could certifie; and Sir Edward (who
hathe taken great paines in this matter) was in the contrie, I
did not know where, nor
<P 165>
when he would retourne; and therefore sent the certificate.
Within two or three daies after, Sir Edward came and shewed me a
note out of the recordes of the Counsell, shewing who was 
Vice- President everie sitting many yeres, but what was fund in
the records of the Assises neither he nor any of the Counsell
did informe me; albeit Sir Edward seemed sorie that my
certificate was sent before he did retourne. Yet, before their
departure, I had the assistance here of Sir Edward and M=r=.
Atturney, and their advise that I should write to my Lord Darcy
to know what place to take, and to learne of auncient men the
usage, &c.; which I did accordingly.
   (\Objectio 2.\) - But the other three gentlemen have made
certificate differing from myne, &c.
   (\Respon.\) - I answere, that, after the letter of the 5=th=
of March directed to me, there came an other letter of the 21 of
the same from your Lordship to me and the rest of the Counsell
of Yorke, whereby authoritie was geven to search the recordes of
the Assises, before denyed; and, bicause my health did not well
serve me, I sent to my Lord of Limerike M=r=. Hales and M=r=.
Ferne, who then onely were at Yorke, praying them to send for
the Clarke of the Assises to search the records of that court,
which I understand was done verie diligently. And, after the
Clarke had retourned his search to the Counsell, subscribed with
his hand, my Lord of Limerike and others then at Yorke did
subscribe their names, and sent it up; neither Sir Thomas
Fairfax nor M=r=. Atturney being then at Yorke. But what they
found, and what they certified, they did not make me privie
neither before their certificate nor after; yet since (I hear)
they found in the records that the late Lord Ewre toke place of
them once or twice, and the same confirmed by some witnesses,
which is said to differ much from my certificate. But (under
reformation) albeit there is contradiction betwene those whom I
did examine by vertue of the first letter, and those that were
examined by the Counsell at Yorke by the later, yet there is no
contradiction betwene the certificates, but a difference onely
(\secundum magis et minus\) , for bothe may be true, &c.
   (\Objectio 3.\) - But, immediately upon receipt of your
Lordships' letter, I writt a private letter to Sir Edward and
M=r=. Atturney, that my opinion was that Barons Vice-Presidents
should take place, &c.
<P 166>
   (\Respon.\) - And I answere, that my opinion was then, and
yet is, that they should have place, if the gaole-deliverie be
kept by the commission dormant to the Lord President and
Counsell. Which is not contrarie to my certificate, wherein by
your direction I was required to certifie what I could learne of
the usage, not what I thought convenient, &c.
   (\Object. 4.\) - But I my self toke the place, &c.
   (\Respon.\) - I answere, that, as I was not President, so was
I not Vice-President, but appointed by hir Majestie's commission
under the great seall to supply the place, which the worthie
late Lord Treasorer advertised me was like to continue untill
hir Highness should resolve of a worthie man to succead the good
Erle of Huntingdon. I did lye at the mannor, and kept the diett
for the Counsell, and the Judges came allwaies to me at their
coming to Yorke, as they did to former Lords Presidents, and now
doe to my Lord now President, and I did sitt betwene them on the
bench, onely when the commissions were in reading and the
chardge in geveing. But (under reformation) I take it, this
maketh nothinge for everie Vice-President: for, the Lord
President may appoint any of the Cousell to be Vice-President,
and Doctor Rokebie, one of the Prebendaries of Yorke, was 
Vice-President; and yet it had not bene convenient that he
should have taken place of the Judges, who are knowne to be wise
and great lawyers, and come with great authoritie for the great
good of the subject, and therefore deserve all honor that may be
geven them without injurie to higher authoritie.
   (\Object. 5.\) - But I gave to much credit to the Lord
Darcie's letter, who, about two yeres before, had written to the
contrary, &c.
   (\Respon.\) - I answere, that what he writt before I can not
tell; but since, he being desired by my Lord of Limerick and
M=r=. Ferne to certifie what place he toke, signified by his
letter to them more plainly then he did to me, viz., that he
gave place to them, bothe in the church and on the bench.
   (\Object. 6.\) - That I have geven the Lord President cause
of exception against me, and therefore it pleaseth your Honors
to use me no more in this particular.
   (\Respon.\) - I answere, that I geve your Honors humble and
heartie thanks, and wish I had not bene used at all. But (I
protest before God) I never meant to crosse my Lord President,
<P 167>
whom I allwaies loved, and doe honor with all my hart, not onely
for his place which he houldeth under hir Majestie, but also for
the deserved great good will I did ever bear to my verie good
Lord his noble father, as worthie a counsellor as ever England
bredd. Thus, beseaching God to blesse this kingdome with hir
Majestie's long and prosperous reigne, and all your Honors with
his manifold graces, long to serve so gratious a sovereigne, to
the great good of this Church and common wealth, I humbly take
leave. From Bishopthorp, the xxx=th= of Maie, 1602.
   Your Honors' in Christe to be commaunded,
   Matth. Ebor.

<Q HUT 1602 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 167>
[} [\LETTER CIV.\] A COPYE OF MY LORD ARCHBISHOP'S LETTER UNTO
THE LORD PRESIDENT.}] [^TO EDMUND SHEFFIELD^]
[\30 Aug. 1602.\]
   Right Honorable, I thanke your Lordship hartely for the booke
and newes you sent me by my Chancellor. The booke I have redd,
and mislike that it should come to the hands either of the
papists (whom it will confirme in their error), or of the simple
protestants, whom I fear it will weaken in their faith, &c.;
ffor, albeit these traitors vomit their poison one against an
other, yet they joine together in casting out poison against
religion and the State. As for hir Majestie's entertainment at
my Lord Keeper's house, I am glad to heare it was to hir good
likinge and best contentment; and (in deede) it could not be
otherwise, ffor, besides the loyall and chearefull harts of the
master of the house and his good ladie (well knowne to hir
Highnes before, and then speciallie shewed), two of the first
creatures that ever God made, and so now two of th' ouldest,
Time and Place, forgetting their yeres, 5564, did (as it were)
caste awaie their crutches and frame themselves to the present
worlde to speake (\placentia\) , concurring, consenting, and
conspiring to cheare and solace hir Highnes, by whose wise and
happie government bothe time and place themselves
<P 168>
have bene much graced. These two are verie nere of kinne to two
oulde predicaments as ould as them selves, (\quando et ubi\) ,
which I praie God may allwaies and everie where likewise concurr
to serve her Majestie; that, whensoever and wheresoever shee
taketh anie thinge in hand, God's holie hande and powerfull
spirit may direct it to his glorie, and hir happines and
comforte, bothe in this world and in the world to come. Thus,
beseaching God to blesse your Lordship, my good Ladie, and all
youres with his manifould graces, I bid you moste hartelie
farewell. From Bishopthorpe, the xxx of August, 1602.
   Your Lordship's in Christe moste assuredly,
   Matth. Ebor.

<Q HUT 1603 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 169>
[} [\LETTER CVI.\] ARCHBISHOP HUTTON TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}] 
[\13 Julii, 1603.\]
   (\Salutem in Sal. &c.!\) I like not in any case that yow
should go to London, the sicknes is so dispersed. Since your
boyes coming hither, I perceaive by a letter from D=r=. Benet
that the coronation is like to hould as was appointed, but with
lesse solemnitie then was expected. I thinke verie fewe will go.
I will write to D=r=. Benet to excuse yow. The Lord blesse yow
and youres with his manifould graces. At Bishopthorp, the
xiij=th= of Julie, 1603.
   Your loving father,
   Matth. Ebor.

<Q HUT 1604 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 170>
[} [\LETTER CVIII.\] MY LORDE'S GRACE [\TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON,
HIS SON.\] }] 
[\18 May, 1604.\]
   (\Salutem, &c.!\) I have kept your sonne Math. here these 4
or 5 daies, fearing the dainger of the sicknes, &c. And now,
being informed that it spreadeth abrode and increaseth in Yorke,
I hould it best that you take him to you, for that I doubt he
can not so well stay here without dainger or great fear so nere
th' infected places and among so manie in this great familie.
And so, praying God to blesse you and all youres with his
manifould graces, with hartie commendations to my good daughter,
I end. Bishopthorp, this xviij=th= of Maie, 1604.
   Youre loving father,
   Matth. Ebor.
<P 171>
   You shall do well either to fetch him or send for him, and
also a toward scholar, a pretie boy, M=r=. Rawson's kinsman,
that waiteth on him. You need send the fewer, because I hear
that M=r=. Crawthorne and Th. Stirkai stay till he comes, and
all my horses are at grasse.
   To my verie loveing sonne, Timothie Hutton, at Marske, with
speede.

<Q HUT 1594 TMATTHEW>
<A TOBIE MATTHEW>
<G M>
<P 188>
[} [\LETTER CXIV.\] TOBIE MATHEW, DEANE OF DURESME, [\TO MR.
TIMOTHY HUTTON.\] }] 
[\Ult. Dec. 1594.\]
   Sir, I am geven to understand you fall to your studies
againe, and thereof am I glad to heare; especially that you take
a speciall delight in historie, the witnes of tyme and memorie
of life, yea after death. Let me recommend to your diligent
reading the book I send you herewith, a translation of a most
excellent author by a great learned frend of myne. You shall in
myne opinion profit and please yourself muche in the perusing
thereof, attending it well, and using with the text the
annotacions, but, of all other thinges, preferring here and
there your Christian judgement before the profane pollicie of
the originall writer. No merveile, for what booke all faltlesse
but the Book of God? And so, hartily wisshing you and yours
longe and prosperously to enjoye the yeares, lyfe, and land of
your honorable and reverend father, I betake you and gentle
M=rs=. Hutton to the grace of God. At Duresme, (\ult. Decemb.\)
1594.
   Your assured loving frend,
   Tobie Matthew.
   To my worshipful and verie loving frende M=r=. Timothie
Hutton, at Awkeland.

<Q HUT 1608 ACAREW>
<A ADRIAN CAREW>
<G M>
<P 208>
[} [\LETTER CXXVII.\] ADRIAN CAREW, MASTER OF WARTON SCHOOL, TO
SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}] 
[\July 27, 1608.\]
   Right worshipfull, my humble dutie remembred, &c. Sir, I
receaved a letter of reprehension of late from my dearest cousen
Sherrard for not wrighting unto you by the returne of John
Ellow, which time would not permitt; yet his legate discovereth
the effectuous zeale of a mind fraught plenteouslie in him with
the bewtie of memorable thankfullnes. He knowes that (\malum non
recedet e domo ingrati\) ; of which I was nither unmindfull,
nither yet do I anie waie distast his grave and strict
admonition in the same. His lines alltogeather incited me to
thankfullnes; yea, thankfullnes to you, to whose extraordinarie
favour I never can be sufficientlie enough thankfull, and, to
use his owne saying, (\Grates persolvere dignas non opis est
nostrae\) , from the bountie of whose charitable palme I
receaved a refuge against all schollars' common enimie, viperous
necessetie, yea a cataplasme carefullie carefullie [\SIC\]
imploid against the frequent wound of this ulcerous world's
unregard of the Muses. Sir, I am not unthankfull, God that knows
my hart is assured. Nither, were that within the limitts of my
power to be procured which should shew it, I would rack my self
to leavie the arrerage, I would not owe it: not that my
<P 209>
shallownes in judgement can intimate anie thing that you expect
other at my hands then a hartie care, and a hand to office that
hart in the true pourtracture of the same care; but because I
would not through my oversight work anie uneavenes in that path
which you so divine wiselie, honourablie, humanelie,
charitablie, and humblie have laid before my deare cousen's
feete; my deare dearest cousen, who hath consented often to my
thought, and I to his, in this (and that without assentation),
you are a man made up of divine wisedome, honour, humanitie,
charitie, and one in whose rank it is rare to find the like for
true humillitie, humilitie the fayre ornament of all grace and
vertue. Sir, I will be thankfull, and my verie soule is
allreadie resolved into a myriad of thanks for your marveylous
respects laid upon us and bounteous effects: but my hart is
ashamed, and I doubt the acceptance; for, being of late sick of
some abuse, my choller willfullie pursued for an untimelie
medicine, having forgotten that (\morbis nihil est magis
periculosum\) then (\immatura medicina\) ; by which I have done
that which will undoe the kind knot of your favour towards me.
The matter I refer to my cousen's lips, being loath to regester
the unhappie cause of my recession in that which should be the
record of my progression in the vertue which you have busied me
in; when he hath spoken it, beleve it (I beseech you), he shall
speake the truth. Credit, I humbly praie you, no vulgar tongue,
for (\Plebi non judicium, non veritas\) . (\Non est consilium in
vulgo, non ratio, non discrimen: ex opinione multa, ex veritate
pauca judicat.\) Nither too much to our predecessors, though
they have bene kind; for no doubt (\Aegris oculis alienam
faelicitatem intuentur\) . And then, I beseech you, give me
leave to be my owne judge. My selfe have done the offence most
against my selfe, for which I will exile my selfe from all hope
of your abused favour; and, I most humblie beseech you, respect
my cousen nothing the worse, in whom you are nothing deceaved.
What you have done for me praie permitt me to resigne againe to
his brothers, whose sufficient lerning for Greeke and Latin can
well discharge this, and a greater charge then this. Their
modestie and civillitie is as their brother's. I doubt not but
you will be pleased in their dilligence, pacience, and
temperance. I will thankfullie make restitution to them of all
that I receaved, except your favour, which I have willfullie
lost. (\Una salus victis nullam sperare salutem.\)
<P 210>
Ireland, which hath begun my griefe, shall ease it, or end it,
as God shall please. For those that have abused me here, God
forgive them. I cannot with pacience live anie longer among
them. (\Nec amissos colores lana refert medicata fuco.\) God
forgive my offence towards you; to redeeme the which, I will
taxe all the actions of my hands, and thoughts of my hart. Yea,
my hart, hands, life, lerning, all that I have, shall be alwaies
readie to be exposed to the honour of you and your most
honourable ladie. I onlie request this one thing at your hands,
your favourable report. I will sowe the seedes of true
repentance for my rash oversight, by the which I hope againe in
time to regaine grace at your honourable hands. (\Multo firmior
est fides quam reponit poenitentia.\) Not forgetting my dutie to
your singular good ladie, your excellent chilldren, the
ingenuous offspring of right generous parents, I a thousand
times recall all your curtesies, readie to take my leave of
discourteous Lancashier. Warton, (\Julii 27=o=\) , 1608.
   Obliged to your worship in all the offices of humilitie and
thankfullnes,
   Adrian Carew.
   To the right worshipful my most worthie good frend, Sir
Timothie Hutton, at Mask, give these with speede.

<Q HUT 1617 T1HUTTON>
<A TIMOTHY HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 217>
[} [\LETTER CXXXIV.\] A COPPIE OF MY LETTER TO MR. DEANE OF
YORKE.}]
[\Julie 8, 1617.\]
   Sir, I must and doe acknowledg, as I ame a poore sonne of a
Levite, that yt had becomd me eare now (yf I held not some
particulars of my poore estate of you) to have tendred the dutye
that I doe owe unto your hollie trybe: but my place of beeing
alderman in thys poore towne of Richmond, wheare I dwell, hath
prevented dyvers intented tymes which I had purposed to have
wayted on you. I would entreate you that myne attendance may be
acceptable in the assyse weeke, at which tyme I doubt not but to
gyve you contentment for such leases as I hould of you; beeing a
greate part of the portion which my deare father left unto my
selfe and manye of my lyttle selves. I have noe reason to press
you for extraordinarye favoure, bycause I have not deserved
anything of you, but to be used as you use others; and I cannot
doubt of that, bycause I heare of your true worth everye way:
humblye thanking God even for the glorye of hys word, and the
good of that church, that he hath sent such an one amongst us.
God is my wyttnes that I speake yt without adulation, yt beeing
a thing very farre from my playne dysposition; and I doe detest
yt either in myselfe or anye. I doe eftsoones entreate your
<P 218>
favoure for thys tyme prefyxed, at which tyme (God wylling) I
wyll attend you; tyll when, and then, and always,
   I rest, &c.
   To M=r=. Deane of Yorke.
   Julie 8, 1617.

<Q HUT 1620 T2HUTTON>
<A TIMOTHY HUTTON 2>
<G M>
<P 225>
[} [\LETTER CXLII.\] TIM. HUTTON, MY KYNSMAN.}] [^TO SIR TIMOTHY
HUTTON^]
[\June 29, 1620.\]
   Right Worshipfull,
   My humble duty remembred; with my thankfullnesse for your
late, as yet, undeserved favor and helpe in the tyme of my
greate nede; with my daylye prayer to the Almighty for your
reward, and contynuall health and happnes, to his best will and
pleasure. May it please you to pardon my bouldnes in that I ame
constrayned to trouble you by reason of my myssefortune, as I
understand by my deare ffreind M=r=. Robert Fort you are fully
made acquaynted with; whose love hath ben such to me that,
unlesse he had byn ordayned of God to worke my good, beinge to
me a straynger, I can see no reasson that I should receve such
kindnesses from him as I have obtyned, in somuch that they have
semed to savor more lyker the deedes of a ffather then a
ffrinde; wherby he, to worke my peace and quiett, hath taken
most of my debtes upon him selfe, and disburssed much mony for
me, and ordered althinges in that forme, beinge a man of good
cappassitie, that, with the help which I understand he did
wright unto you to be pleassed to doe for me in the behalfe of
my good, which to my joy, as I understand, you have promysed to
doe for me, I may be rayssed from nothing to be able to repaye
your former deede, worthey of me to be remembred, and lykewisse
lyve of my selfe to the rejoysement of all my good ffreindes,
and especyally not forget from whence all my good cometh; the
tyme being very short which muste establish my hoppes, which
only relye upon your helpe in the forme M=r=. Fort hath shewed
your worship, the which I refer to your worthy consyderacion.
And so, as my bounden duty commandeth, I shall never seasse to
pray to the Allmighty God, whoe is the sender of all goodnes
upon his servants, to multyply
<P 226>
and increasse your worship with all the contents of this world
and the joyes of the etternall worlde to come; and thus I sease
at thes tyme to trouble your worship any ffurther, humbly
desiring your answer. From the Blew Ancker in Feld Lane, London,
June the 29=th= day.
   Your lovinge servant, and at your worship's command.
   Timothie Hutton.

<Q HUT 1621 T2HUTTON>
<A TIMOTHY HUTTON 2>
<G M>
<P 228>
[} [\LETTER CXLV.\] TIM. HUTTON, MY KYNSMAN, TO JO. ELLOW.}]
[^TO JOHN ELLOW^]
[\Maie 31, 1621.\]
   Kinde John Ellow, my best love and harty commondationes
remembred unto you. This is to certifie you that I have receved
your letter, and M=r=. Forte another ffrom Sir Timothie, for the
which I give you many thoussand thankes; intreating you to
deliver M=r=. Forte's letter to Sir Timothie, and to further me
in my affares: thus desiring your love to speake to Sir Timothie
for me to stand my frend at this time, and I shall be mad for
ever, and my fortunes raised againe. M=r=. Forte and his wife
and Susan remembers their loves to you. Soe I end, leavinge you
to the protection of Allmightie God. Frome the Blew Ancker in
Feld Lane, London, May the 31=th= day.
   Your loving ffrind to his power in what I may,
   Timothie Hutton.
   To his assured and very lovinge ffrind, John Ellow, dewelling
with Sir Timothie Hutton, knight, at Maske, deliver this.

<Q HUT 1621 T2HUTTON>
<A TIMOTHY HUTTON 2>
<G M>
<P 228>
[} [\LETTER CXLVI.\] TIM. HUTTON, MY KYNSMAN, TO JO. ELLOW.}]
[^TO JOHN ELLOW^]
[\June 14, 1621.\]
   Kind John Elow, my best love and harty commendations
remembred unto you; hopping of your good health, with all the
rest of my good ffrinds. This is to certyfie you the cause of my
wrighting unto you is to intreat you to speake to Sir Timothie
for me; and that he would be pleased to doe somthing for me at
this tyme, for I never had more ned in all my lyfe. I doe owe
M=r=. Fort +L10. 12 (^s.^) , which doth greave me very sore, he
having layd out the most of it out of his purse to keppe me from
prisson; and now he will doe no more, and I cannot blame him,
for, had not he bene, I had ben dead in prisson afore now. Kind
John Elow, speake to Sir Timothie that he would be pleased to
lend
<P 229>
me +L10 12 (^s.^) to pay him, and I shall thinke my selfe happy,
and be bound to pray for his worship, and in tyme pay his
worship agayne. Soe I would intreat you to showe Sir Timothie
this letter, wherby he may understand my wants at this tyme, for
they wear never more. No more at this tyme, but, intreating your
answer, I commit you to the protection of Allmighty God. From
the Blew Anchor in Fild Lane, London, June the 14=th=.
   Susan hath sent you a token for a remembrance, of hir owne
makinge.
   Your loving ffrind to his power,
   Timothie Hutton.

<Q HUT 1623 WALDBROUGH>
<A WILLIAM ALDBROUGH>
<G M>
<P 231>
[} [\LETTER CLI.\] WILL. ALDBROUGH [\TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON\] .}]
[\Januarie 15, 1622-3.\]
   Ryght Worshippful.
   Forasmuch as I am not able in bodye to come to your sessions
at this instant, having formerly bene att the sessions at
Hemsley; therfore I thought fitt to signifie unto you, thatt yf
yt stand with your good-likinge, that, according to his
Majestie's orders, there shall be a division of our selves into
sundry wapentakes for the spede preventing and remidinge of the
dearth of corne and other victualls according to the said
orders, I shall be redye for the spede execucion of the said
service to joyne with those of our assosiats as you shall think
fitting for the execucion of the said service within the
wapentake of Hallikell and Hangeast, upon notice of the tyme and
place which I thinke fitting afore your departure from sessions
to be sett downe, and notice therof to be geven to the head
constable now present at your sessions. The place I think
fitting to be att Burneston; the tyme as shortly as you can; the
charge to bee that the pettie constable and bring [\SIC\] a note
of all brewsters lycensed and lycensed maltsters, and the
malsters to be present, all badgers and ingrossers
<P 232>
of corne, and whatt further derections you will sett downe.
Thus, upon notice of your pleasures hearein, I will be redye to
the best of my knowledg to do his Majesty service, both now and
all other tymes.
   Yours in all kindenes,
   Will. Aldiburgh.
   Ellingthorp, Januarij 15, 1622.
   William Rey of Kirbie super Moram, I hold him not fitting to
tiple, for that he doth harbour by a whole weak to gether
contemptououse persons to the law; therefore I pray you lett him
be disallowed by sessions.

<Q HUT 1623 T1HUTTON>
<A TIMOTHY HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 236>
[} [\LETTER CLV.\] A COPIE OF MY LETTER TO MR. RYGGE.}]
[\Aug. 18, 1623.\]
   Sir, I suppose you are nott ygnorant of a match which was
intended betwyxt my maugh Cleburne hys eldest sonne Edmund and
my daughter. I doe protest unto you (in the word of truth) that
the breach thereof is no smale dyscontentment unto me; and that
I must needs cleare the young gentleman soe farre, that there
was noe fault neither in hym selfe nor on hys syde, but onely
the dysaffaction of my foolysh daughter, whoe is lyke (and
shall) to pay for hyr follye.
   I understand that there hath beene conference betwyxt hym and
you touching hys sonne with your daughter, whearein (yf ytt
shall please God that yt goe forward) I shall nott be a lyttle
glad that he shall match with one of such integretye as you are
reported to be. Hys estate is fayre, and such as (with a lyttle
tyme) will free hym from all incombrances: and bycause I know
you cannott but be desyrous to know them, I have delyvared a
note of them unto my maugh (the bearer heareof) which he wyll
shew you. As for myne owne mony, which I have payd, I wyll nott
take one pennye for use, butt that I may have ytt upon one
quarter's warning yf of necessytye I must requyre ytt; which I
thinke wyll nott be hastely, for my daughter is nott much above
fowarteene yeares ould. As for other bonds which I am entred
into for hym to supply hys occasions, I hope noe reasonable man
wyll thinke ytt unreasonable to desyre securitye for myne
indemnitye.
   I wyll wyllinglye release any interest that I have in hys
estate, upon such securitye as shalbe reasonablye requyred; and
that the covenants for the good of the chyldren be parformed,
for I must profess that I wyll never betray that trust that is
reposed in others with myself for them whylst I lyve.
   These things performed, and that there be an agreement
betwyxt you, (which I beseach God to dyrect and bless,) I shalbe
verye desyrous that the busynes may receave an overture,
<P 237>
and wylbe wylling to meate whensoever and whearesoever you or
any shall please to prefyx. And thus I rest,
   Your verrye loving freind, 
   T. H.
   Marske, Aug. 18, 1623.
   My letter to Mr. Rygge.

<Q HUT 1623 T1HUTTON>
<A TIMOTHY HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 245>
[} [\LETTER CLIX.\] MY LETTER TO MY LORD'S GRACE OF YORKE FOR
MR. SHERRARD.}] [^TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK^]
[\8ber ult. 1623.\]
   My dutye remembred, &c.
   I made bould att my last beeing att Byshoppthorp humblye to
entreate your Grace's favoure in the behalfe of thys bearer
M=r=. Sherrard; and I dyd then intimate unto your Grace that
(with your favourable acceptance) I would wryte with hym unto
you att such tyme as he brought the booke which your Grace
requyred hym to wryte.
   I must acknowledg that I have nott deserved to obtayne any
sute of you; yett such is the nature of necessytye that yt
oftentymes presumeth upon (\non erubescunt literae\) . And, now
that I have begunne to speake unto my Lord, (\"ne quaeso
accendatur ira Domini, si loquar tantum hac vice"\) . Good my
Lord, even for God's sake, hys glorie, and the good of hys
Church, lett me beseech and humbly beg your favour for hym,
whose integretye of lyfe I know, and whose learning you know,
and for both I know nott many such.
   I know your Grace hath many worthye Chaplaynes, whoe depend
on you for there preferrement; butt myne humble sute is, that
(as God hath made them fyshers of men) your Grace would bestow
such a poore flye on hym as your Chaplaynes happelie wyll nott
vouchsafe to bate there hookes withall. The poore meanes that he
hath is nott worth twentye pownds (\per annum\) (I speake of the
most), having a wyfe, twoe chyldren and one half (I speake of
the least); and such is the myserie of the tyme, and my desyre
to wyshe hym good, as I would wyllingly gyve out of my poore
estate one, twoe, or three hundreth powndes to buye hym a lyving
yf I knew how to come by ytt: butt thys I make bould to wryte
unto your Grace to shew my symple condition to hym as a learned
mynyster, and as I am myselfe a poore sonne of a Levyte; your
Grace's honorable and free dysposition to all schollars beeing
known unto all. Thus,
<P 246>
loath to add tediousnes to bouldnes, and humblye craving pardon
for the same, I doe rest,
   Humblye at your Grace's comandment,
   T. H.
   Richmund, (\8=bris= ult.\) [\1623.\]

<Q HUT 1623 T1HUTTON>
<A TIMOTHY HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 246>
[} [\LETTER CLX.\] MY LETTER TO MR. DODSWORTH, CHANCELLOR, FOR
ETHERINGTON.}] 
[\9ber 22, 1623.\]
   Sir, I have made bould heeretofore to entreate your lawfull
favour for Tho. Cooke, alias Etherington, in hys tedious and
chardgeable sute; which now I heare is to be sentenced upon
Thursday next. If you please to remember, I was att your owne
howse, when and wheare I shewed you all the evydences which
weare taken upon oath for the King, and they prooved strongly
for hym; otherwyse he had been condemned att the last assises,
and had suffered death, which had gyven an end to all hys
trobles: butt now, whatt with the hanging of cause soe long, and
that yf sentence goe agaynst hym, ytt wylbe worse then death
unto hym, beeing utterlye undon allreadye.
   And, good Sir, gyve me leave to remember you, that, when I
shewed you the depositions, you sayd that you had beene
stronglye enformed of the heynousnes of the fact, and that you
never heard soe much to the contrarye before; and that, yf they
weare true, there would be no doubt but the cause would goe well
enough on hys syde.
   Sir, nott to interpose my poore opynyon with your reverend
judgment, I doe proteste unto you even upon my conscience and
knowledg ytt is as conscionable a cause (whearein I beseech your
favour) as ever I knew in my lyfe.
   I would nott wrongfullye intimate thus much unto you, bycause
if the cause goe agaynst hym ytt is hys undoing (as he is
allreadye), yea though ytt weare upon the hazard of myne owne
overthrow, for all the worlde; butt onlye that I cannott
contayne but in soe conscionable a case to entreate your lawfull
and just censure.
<P 247>
   And the rather for that I have heard ( (\nescio quo\) ) that
you are resolved to gyve sentence agaynst hym; which I doe
rather wonder att then beleave, knowing that the judgement of a
judge is (untyll ytt be delyvered) (\in scrinio pectoris\) .
   He hath beene mooved by dyvers to appeale further, but I have
styll dyswaded hym from ytt; assuring hym of your upryghtnes and
lawfull favoure, wheareof I doubt not, and whearein you shall
fynd hym an humble and thankefull remembrancer of the same. And
thus, loath to add tediousnes to bouldnes,
   I rest your ever loving frend,
   T. H.
   (\9ber\) 22, 1623.

<Q HUT 1624 WALDBROUGH>
<A WILLIAM ALDEBROUGH>
<G M>
<P 248>
[} [\LETTER CLXII.\] WILL. ALDEBROUGH [\TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON\]
COM. PRO RECUSAN.}] 
[\5 Sep. 1624.\]
   Syr Tymothie, I would desire you, as convenienly as you
could, to send me word what tyme and place you appoynte for the
executione of his Majestie's commission to us and others
directed for the levying of his Majestie's fines for the fynes
of the recusants. It is lett me understand (but I am nott
certayne) that the Commissiners have setten upon the said
commisson in all devisions save Richmondshire; so I would desyre
you that wee might not be slacke therin, and that you would
appoynt a place within twelfe myles, for I am not able further
to travill. Thus, with my love and kinde wishes to you, my
ladye, and your children, I committ you to God.
   Yours in all kindenes,
   Will. Aldeburgh.
   Ellingthorpe, the 5=th= Sept. 1624.

<Q HUT 1637 JJACKSON>
<A JOHN JACKSON>
<G M>
<P 259>
[} [\LETTER CLXVI.\] JOHN JACKSON, RECTOR OF MASKE, [\TO MATTHEW
HUTTON, ESQ.\] }] 
[\June 2, 1637.\]
   Good Sir, I do so thirst for your returne, and languish so
thorough my defeated hope of having enjoyed yow heere this
night, that I have neither mind ne power to write more than two
words. And (indeed) to be cramped with reading a short letter is
less torment then to be putt on the rack with a long. Touching
your sweet self-multiplyed ones (of which yow desire to heare in
the first place), M=r=. Jones, in your absence, hath bene as
carefull of them as one could be of a christall glass. They are
all three as your owne harts could wish them; that is, very
well, save that Jacky laboureth a little in his eyes. Babby
(whose innocent actions carry theyr warrant with them) cheeres
us all with her warme and moyst kisses. Touching the mony yow
wrote about, I can say nothing but as the day shall bring forth.
You know who is to be the paymaster of the greater part of it;
one who, if all the rules of physiognomy be not false, will not
pay just at his day. The bearer heereof will also beare yow all
the regreets that yow can expect from your owne family. I send
yow mine heere under seale, not so much for the secrecy as for
the sureness thereof. Also to M=rs=. Hutton and M=rs=. Rothy
more harty affection then poetry can feigne or oratory vary;
also to
<P 260>
yow all this short but full prayer, Jesu be your Jesus! From
Marske, a place seated betweene 4 great hills, or (as yow may
properly speake) the English Alpes; which, though it be our
habitation, yet, in your so long absence, our place of
banishment.
   Yours verily, to be ever commanded,
   Joh. Jackson.
   June 2=o=, 1637.

<Q HUT 1638 JJACKSON>
<A JOHN JACKSON>
<G M>
<P 260>
[} [\LETTER CLXVII.\] JOHN JACKSON [\TO MATTHEW HUTTON, ESQ.\]
}] 
[\March 1637-8.\]
   Good S=r=, We now begin to grow impatient of your long
absence from us: so, as I am a generall suitour to pray yow to
fold upp your businesses and make hast northe-ward. By our
neighbour, M=r=. Nicholson, I wrote to yow. By your servant, Th.
Cl., I receaved a kind letter from yow, for which I owe yow much
thancks; whereby I perceave yow have very notably fitted mee
with a trilingue psalterium, which indeed is just such an one as
I would have (if it be well printed). For the Chaldee or Syriack
I care not, and only mentioned them because I thought yow would
hardly gett one of the three tongues only. I pray, Sir, let it
be preserved even as it is, without alteration of binding, if
already yow have not delivered it over to be broken by the
bookbinder. So as the book yow had upp with yow being fayrely
bound, and that only brought downe, yow have fully therein
concurred with my desires. I hope by this tyme M=r=. Bulwer's
debet is payed yow. I must needs, in the behalf of my wife, pray
yow also to buy her 2 fayr and usefull bone combes, about 16 or
18=d=. a piece. God send us yow saffe home is a piece of our
March leiturgy, and of
   Yo=r= very fr. and servant,
   Jo. Jackson.

<Q HUT 1604 M1HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 1>
<G M>
<P 304>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXII.\] THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK TO THE BISHOP OF
DURHAM.}] [^TO TOBIE MATTHEW^]
[\7 Mar. 1603-4.\]
   (\Salutem in Christo!\) I think my self very much beholden
unto your Lordship for your many pitthie kind letters. Your
former good advertisements towching the late Conference and
Commissioners, &c. did pass somewhat slowlie; but your woeful
letter of the heavie news of the death of that most reverend and
worthy Archbishop, brought to me on Saturday last, came too, too
soon, the Lord God knoweth. Many (no doubt) may, and do lament,
that his Majesty hath lost a faithful, good counsillor; the
Church a great and notable pillar and patron; and my self also
have special cause to sorrow for the want of such an auncient,
constant, and dear friend. It is a singular comfort and
incouragement to us all, that his Highness vouchsafed so
graciouslie to visit him; wherein, as in many other excellent
vertues and things, he doth imitate his late dear sister, worthy
Queen Elizabeth, who did alway bear and shew a special good
affection toward him. God move his Majestyes royal and religious
heart (the sooner the better) to make special choice of one to
succeed him; and I think that either your Lordship, or my Lord
of Winchester, is like to have the place: albeit the dealing
with the Sec [\Secular\] Priests against the Jesuits in his
Majesty's time is now said to be a good service, and that it was
done only to advance his Majesty's title against the Spanish
faction.
   I send you and my Lord of London my proxy, jointly and
severally, lest your Lordship should happen to be sick, &c. I
pray you help Sir John Bennet to such copies or things as are to
be sent hither, and must be confirmed by Convocation. Thus,
beseeching God to bless your Lordship with His manifold graces,
and that I may never see you more (though I love you entyrely)
but that you may be placed there, to God's glory, the good of
<P 305>
His church, and your own contentment, I bid you most hartily
farewel. From Bishopthorp, the vii=th= of March, 1603.
   Your Lordship's very assured loving friend and brother,
   Matth. Ebor.
   To the Right Reverend Father, my very good Lord and Brother,
the Bishop of Duresme.

<Q HUT 1623 THBOWES>
<A THOMAS BOWES>
<G M>
<P 308>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXVI.\] THOMAS BOWES TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}] 
[\4 May, 1623.\]
   Sir, I have beene at Newcastle and at Sir Wm. Wrey's, but Sir
Wm. Wrey was gone into Yorkshire. I stande in doubt I shall not
gitt money in tyme. I have spoken with one M=r=. Coale; his
answere is delatorye. He seemes as thoughe he woulde buy yt; but
he hath an offer of Folansbye by my nephew Hiltone, that lyes
nearer to Newcastle, and therefore he will not part with his
money untill he be resolved for yt: yet he hath promised me an
answere this weeke by our carryers that goes to Newcastle. Upon
his words I went to the east of Bishoppricke to have spoken with
my nephew John Hilton, but I missed of
<P 309>
him; and his wife tells me that she thinkes yt is not of sale. I
shall have answere from John Hilton tomorrow, as I expecte. I
have written to Sir Wm. Wrey by this bearer: what yt will worke
with him I know not; but, yf he please to doe me the favour he
may doe, I shall rest ever beholden to him. If he returne me any
answere, call for yt and see yt, yf you please; and, howesoever
he please to doe, I will not cease to labor to procure this
money at some hand, and therefore I staye tomorrow at home to
heare from him. I have ridden downe my grasse horses in this
journey, otherwise I would have come over; but I must needs ease
them to-daye, to have them readye upon Tuesday. Thus,
commendinge my love to you, I rest
   Your assured lovinge brother,
   Thomas Bowes.

<Q HUT 1624 THBOWES>
<A THOMAS BOWES>
<G M>
<P 309>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXVII.\] THOMAS BOWES TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}] 
[\3 Jan. 1623-4.\]
   Sir, I praye you let me intreate you to enter bond agayne to
my cosin Wycliffe for the 50=li= that you stand bound for with
M=r=. Blackborne. I intreated my cosin Wycliffe to put in my
name; but yt seemes his sonne hath mistaken yt, for my cosin
Wycliffe haith sent his sonne and a bond onelye with your name
and John Blackburn's. I have intreated M=r=. Blackburn to stand
bound agayne, and he is come to our house, where wee expect the
bond; and, when he hath sealed yt, I will come up with my cosin
Ascoughe to you. Soe, comendinge my love to you, I rest
   Your assured lovinge brother,
   Thomas Bowes.
   Januarye 3=d=, 1623.

<Q HUT 1624 THBOWES>
<A THOMAS BOWES>
<G M>
<P 310>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXVIII.\] THOMAS BOWES TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}] 
[\31 Oct. 1624.\]
   Sir, I praye you be pleased either to send one to Sir Conyers
Darcye for the deed, that he wilbe pleased to bringe it to you
tomorrow to Bedall, or send your man from Bedall for yt
tomorrow; for I can not call upon Tuesday with any conveniency
at Horneby, beinge to speake with M=r=. Davill that morninge,
for sooner I can't gett to him. I goe this night to Streatlam
for my sister's joyntur, and return tomorrow, and soe to Yorke.
I praye you therefore eyther send your man in the morninge to
Sir Conyers for yt, or from Bedall for yt. Soe in hast
comendinge my love to you I rest
   Your assured lovinge brother,
   Thomas Bowes.
   Oct. 31=st=. [\ENDORSED\] 1624.

<Q HUT 1625 M2HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 2>
<G M>
<P 310>
[} [\LETTER CLXXXIX.\] MATTHEW HUTTON TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}] 
[\After 27 Mar. 1625.\]
   Sir, My duty bindes me to this observance, as to give you a
weekely accompt of our parliamentary proceedinges. My last
letters acquainted you with such passages as had had there
overture in my absence, since which time (\"sic se res habet"\)
. A select committee of 12 spent the beginninge of this weeke
(the House in the mean time not sitting) in examininge all the
phisitions and surgeons that attended of our late King att his
death, about a potion which was given by the Duke of Buckingham
to the King, and a plaister applyed by his directions; both of
them being contrary to the general directions of all the
phisitions, and absolutely disliked and gainesaid by some, by
name D=r=. Ramsey (who since his examination is committed):
which act of the Duke was judged, first by the judgement of the
12, and afterwards upon report to the House, to be and act of a
transcendent presumption,
<P 311>
and of a dangerous consequence; and so resolved to be annexed to
the Duke's charge. Montagu is, for his booke, transmitted to the
higher House; and his booke judged to be contrary to some of the
articles maintained by our Church. The Earle of Bristow was sent
for, as was supposed, as a delinquent; but must first come into
the higher House as a Peere: this 'generally thought the King
will be his accuser. (\Caetera quis nescit?\) His sonne, this
morninge, presented our House with a petition containinge many
articles against the Duke; and those of such consequence, that
it is probable that one of them will suffer. I intend (God
willinge) to put in my bill of Thursday next; I pray God send
itt good success. Sir John Bennett is not yet come to towne,
neyther can I make any certainty of any money. M=r=. Sotherne is
content that we shall have a parley, but what it will produce I
cannot as yett imagine; I am advised both by M=r=. Justice
Hutton and others to buy him out, though we pay deer for itt:
and therefore, good Sir, acquaint my unkles with the dangers,
that they may be motives for them to allow of our composition;
for, when we shall have both Marbury his recognizance, and these
two statutes in our owne power to extend upon the estate, we
need not doubt but that all subsequent securityes will be glad
of reasonable composition. And thus, with an humble tender of my
duty, I rest
   Your obedient sonne,
   Matthew Hutton.
   Fleet Street, att the signe of the Ship, neere Temple Barr.

<Q HUT 1625 THBOWES>
<A THOMAS BOWES>
<G M>
<P 311>
[} [\LETTER CXC.\] THOMAS BOWES TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}] 
[\20 May, 1625.\]
   Sir, I have beene diverse wayes to have gott money, but as
yet I cannot finde any that hath money or will finde money:
onelye M=r=. Dawson of Newcastle hath ready money, but he hath
gone throw with M=r=. Trolopp for his land, and payes him this
<P 312>
day +L1,900; that bargayne was once gone back, but they are now
agreed. I know M=r=. Robinson woulde gladly buy some lande, and
yett I cannot gett him to buy myne: and in good faythe he shall
have yt free of all troubles, by God's grace, yf he will buy;
and he shall have yt leased, yf he like, for 21 yeares. I have
sought diverse wayes, and yet will looke for more, that I may
satisfy your last kindnes, as all your other, with what
conveniency I can; and I praye you, yf he have any occasion to
come to you, that you will speake to Williamson of Barton to buy
parte of yt. I entreated my nephew Dodsworth to speake with him
in that kinde. Thus, commendinge my love to you, desirous to see
you shortly, I rest
   Your assured lovinge brother,
   Thomas Bowes.
   Streatlam, the 20=th= May, 1625.

<Q HUT 1626 M2HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 2>
<G M>
<P 312>
[} [\LETTER CXCI.\] MATTHEW HUTTON TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}]
[\23 Sep. 1626.\]
   Sir, M=r=. Sotherne hath falsifyed his trust, and this
morninge before I gott to towne arrested my unckle Thomas; who,
for any thing I can gather from him, is content to undergoe the
extreamity of the law, and that out of willfulnes rather then
necessity. He intendeth, yf he can prevayl with the 
Under- Sheriff, to see you in his way; in which respect I have
made bold humbly to intreat your forbearance of any further
engaging yourselfe untill all such to whom any preceding
incumbrances do appertaine be called in, to knowe what security
they will be content to accept off, that so we may know the
uttermost of our dangers before we engage ourselves any further.
I intend this night to know Sir Talbot his intention, and
presently after you shall partake the same. Thus cravinge pardon
for my boldness, humbly cravinge your blessing for
   Your dutifull sonne
   Matthew Hutton.
   Rich. 23=th= 7=ber=, 1626.
   To his lovinge father, S=r= Timothy Hutton, K=t=., att
Popleton, be these del. The bearer is satisffyed.

<Q HUT 1626 THBOWES>
<A THOMAS BOWES>
<G M>
<P 313>
[} [\LETTER CXCII.\] THOMAS BOWES TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}]
[\25 Sep. 1626.\]
   Sir, M=r=. Sotherne has arrested me upon the first statute,
being 600=li=. I am now here in the castle at Yorke, and came
hither yesterday; I could gitt neyther paper nor inke untill my
man came, for otherwise I had written to you yesterday. I think
I must give bond for my true imprisonment; and therefore I have
made bolde to write theese to you, and to intreate you to joyne
with me for security, and my sonne shall give you what bonde you
please to keepe you harmeles of that bonde. I came upon such a
sudden that I am unprovided of money; I praye you therefore that
you will be pleased to lend me tenn pounds for sixe weeks, and
you shall then have yt repayed. I have not as yet spoken with
M=r=. Blawithe what bond he will require: but, require what he
will, I hope you are persuaded I will not offer to doe my self
or frends wrong in yt; yt beinge nowe way beneficiall to me, but
hurtfull. Thus, comendinge my love to you and the Ladye Hutton,
I rest
   Your assured lovinge brother
   Thomas Bowes.
   From the Castle at Yorke, this 25=th= of Sept. 1626.

<Q HUT 1627 TABOWES>
<A SIR TALBOT BOWES>
<G M>
<P 314>
[} [\LETTER CXCIV.\] SIR TALBOT BOWES TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}]
[\20 Jan. 1626-7.\]
   Maugh! I perceyve by my sister, that, though sundrye of my
supposed freindes be lyke doves that forsake ruinous houses, yet
yowe contynue still the same yowe alwayes were; our declininge
fortunes have made no alteration in your affection. I have now
no meanes of requitall of any your least favours, but onelye to
gyve youe thankes for all togyther. If I shoulde enter into
particulars, I know not where to beginne; but that which is in
present use is freshest in memorye: and therefore, first, I
thank you for your tabacco sent to my wyf; for I owe as much
thankes as she, bycause I participate with her in the takying of
yt. I cannot be unmyndefull to gyve you thankes for your sonne
Phillip's companye with us, for he gave us a sermon wherein we
receyved muche comfort and great cause of rejoycinge. In good
fayth, I am verye glad to see his good proofs; and, the rather,
bycause I doubte not but yt will gyve you an extraordinarye
contentment. I have had a great desyre to come to see you; and
it is not distance of place, nor unseasonableness of weather, or
yet wayes, that coulde keepe me from you: but my brother's
misfortune makes me afrayd to fall into the same danger, and so
I hope you will take yt. How thinges stand between Richard
Fletcher and us, my sister hath related to you. I intend the
next weeke to wryte to him, and what answere he gyves me you
shall heare so soon as I can. In the mean tyme I will saye noe
more but hast, hast; lappinge up in sylence what I cannot
expresse in wordes. And among my manye afflictions, next after
my spirituall comfort, this is my last consolation, that you do
still accept me into your good
<P 315>
opinion; whiche I will ever seeke to preserve, that I maye be
still reputed
   Your brother-in-law and true love,
   Talbot Bowes.
   Streatlam, the 29=th= of Januarye, 1626.
   To the Ryght Worshippfull my verie lovinge brother, Sir
Tymothye Hutton, Knight, gyve these.

<Q HUT 1627 M2HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 2>
<G M>
<P 315>
[} [\LETTER CXCV.\] MATT. HUTTON [\TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON, HIS
FATHER\] .}]
[\9=ber= 2, 1627.\]
   Sir, I thanke God I am safely arrived att Marske, and left my
wyfe (as wee thinke and hope) past all danger; for the 9=th= day
was past ere I left her, and they att the height. I intend to
goe to Littleburne to her of Tuesday, in hope to bringe her home
(with the help of the coach) the latter end of that weeke: yf
she be not able to ride, then I must leave her. And immediately
after Martinmas day I will hasten to Popleton to observe your
directions, and follow the advice of counsell in takinge
security for such further engagementes as we shall engage our
selves for my unckles. And thus, with the tender of my duty to
your selfe, and my service to my Lady and M=r=. Weekes, I rest
   Your dutifull sonne,
   Matth. Hutton.
   Marske, 2=d= (\9=ber=\) , 1627.

<Q HUT 1627 TABOWES>
<A SIR TALBOT BOWES>
<G M>
<P 315>
[} [\LETTER CXCVI.\] SIR TALBOT BOWES TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON.}]
[\18 Nov. 1627.\]
   Sir, I was muche comforted and refreshed with hope that, by
your good meanes and your sonne's, my brother should have had
present delyverye from his long and tedious imprisonment: but I
perceyve yt is God's will yet to trye me further how I can beare
his hand; for of late I receyved a letter from my nephew
Matthew, wherein he desyred that with patience his jorney to
London
<P 316>
for that occasion might be deferred till Candlemas terme, in
respect both of his owne weaknes and his wyf's dangerous
sicknes, whom to leave so soone in suche a case woulde be to her
a great discomfort and discouragement. I returned him answere,
that God forbyd I shoulde intreate him to anythinge that was
eyther an impayringe of his owne health or a discomfort to his
wyfe; and, in good fayth, I then writ truely and ingeniouslye as
I thought: but since I hear that his wyf is pretylye well
recovered, and I hope he himselfe may undertake suche a jorney
without danger; whiche yf yt may be, then I woulde intreate your
furtherance thereunto. It is true that my brother's imprisonment
is greevous unto me, in respect he is my brother; and yt is
augmented by this, that yt is generally apprehended to be for my
cause. I have no freinde in the world whom I dare intreate in so
great a busines as his deliverye but your self alone; and yet I
am not so thirstye to compasse myne owne desyre, nor so
respectlesse of the wellfare of yourself and your posterytye, as
to intreate you to anythinge unlesse you first see yourself
freed from feare of future danger. But, yf that may be done,
then myne earnest desyre is for expedition in the busines; for I
perceyve delayes wilbe a great discomfort to my brother, and in
that respect too grevous to my self. I will saye no more, but
the experience of your former love hath made me adventure upon
this request; and, yf there be any cause of my presence to make
securytye, upon notice thereof I will not fayle to come to
Yorke: and in the mean tyme thinke this of me, I beseeche you,
that I will never forget what you have done for
   Your distressed brother-in-lawe and love,
   Talbot Bowes.
   Streatlam, the 18=th= of November, 1627.

<Q HUT 1628 M2HUTTON>
<A MATTHEW HUTTON 2>
<G M>
<P 316>
[} [\LETTER CXCVII.\] MATTHEW HUTTON TO SIR TIMOTHY HUTTON, HIS
FATHER.}]
[\6 Feb. 1627-8.\]
   Sir, Tis now certainly agreed that there shall be a
parliament, and to begin upon the 17=th= of March. Good Sir,
sollicite the
<P 317>
towne that wee may continew our places, that I may endeavour the
prosecution of that course which I formerly intended as the
onely meanes we have to attaine our ease and comfort. Yf my
cosin Christopher Wandesford be not off the House, I fear we
shall not effect our desires; and therefore, yf S=r=. Talbot
will not be perswaded to desist, I pray you lett my cosin have
the place rather then myselfe. I was in hope to have gott out of
towne this weeke, but I fear I shall not; for some of the
gentlemen with whom I am to treat be out of towne, and I must
stay there returne. I have placed my brother Thomas with M=r=.
Farmer: the indentures are not yet sealed, so as I cannot send
you the conditions. My brother Phillip prosecutes his suit, but
I much fear the success will not answear his paines. The 20=li=,
as dew upon your accompt, we must take order to pay; but we hope
to gett my order from the Barons of the Exchequer to stay the
seisure for the 60=li= till there come a charge demonstratinge
the particulars, which they thinke will be (\ad Graecas
calendas\) . And thus, with the tender of my duty to your selfe,
and my service to my Ladye (whose freindes are all well), I rest
   Your dutifull sonne,
   Matth. Hutton.
   London, 6=th= Feb. 1627.
   I am summoned by the bell to doe the last offices of a friend
to M=r=. Christopher Brooke.

<Q HUT 1629 ABOWES>
<A ANNE BOWES>
<G F>
<P 317>
[} [\LETTER CXCVIII.\] ANNE, WIFE OF THOMAS BOWES, TO MATTHEW
HUTTON.}] [^TO MATTHEW HUTTON, ESQ.^]
[\1629.\]
   Good Nephew, Let me intreat you to looke amongst your
writings for the articles that was last agreed upon betwixt Sir
Gorge Bowes and mi husband, for I think you have them; for, if
you cannot helpe me to them, I knowe not what to doe: for Sir
Gorge Bowes wil not pay the rent charg which was due at
Martinmas last, but still puts me of that there is some
reckening betwixt his unckell and him, which I knowe not how to
answer till I se the
<P 318>
articles: for, if there be anything in them unperformd, so it
is; for, since the time those was maid, I am sure we neither
bought nor tooke any thing of him. Good Sir, for God sake
perrues the articles, and, as you find them, let me have your
best adviss what to doe, for I would be verie loth to doe Sir
Gorge any wrong; and yet mi owne necesseties presethe me so,
that, if it be due, I would have it. There is tow-and-fortie
shillings more which Sir Gorge should have paid me mor than a
year since, but I canot get one peny from him. The rent charg
was assined me to pay for that ground I hav of Will Dowethwat at
Barforth, and it much greves me that I should be soe ill a
tenant as not to paye my rent when it is due; for I only desird
that I might hav that rent charg assind me to discharg that rent
at Barforth, thinkin it would alwaies hav bene surly payd at
such times as it was due: but he stil delaies, and forceth me to
wrong you for your rent. Thus, hoping you will excuse me at this
time, promising hereafter to be a better tanant, I rest with mi
true and due respect to you and all yours, desiring still to
remain
   Your faithfull loving aunt to her pore,
   Anne Bowes.
   [\NO DIRECTION.\]

<Q HUT 1630 THBOWES>
<A THOMAS BOWES>
<G M>
<P 318>
[} [\LETTER CXCIX.\] THOMAS BOWES TO MATTHEW HUTTON.}] [^TO
MATTHEW HUTTON, ESQ.^]
[\27 June, 1630.\]
   Sir, Upon perusall of your counsell opinion, I finde that he
insists much upon a deede made from Sir George Bowes to you of
the castle, mannor, and lordship of Streatlam, (\anno\) 1629.
Sir George Bowes att that time hadd nothing to doe with the
castle or mannor, but I shall not dispute eyther his right or
ours at a distance: onely give me leave to acquainte you, that,
unlesse you will be pleased to come over accordinge to your
agrement and mine, the tenants will drive your tenants' goods;
which I should be loath should be done untill wee had a fuller
understandinge of the busines.
<P 319>
   My cozen Cleburne went this morninge to Thornton from hence:
she expected to have mett you here; but faylinge, she desired me
to acquaint you, that you will heare of her eyther att Cillerby
or there. Be assured none is more unwillinge that any trouble
should fall out betwixt you and my brother then your
affectionate cozen,
   Thomas Bowes.
   June 27=th=, 1630.
   For his kinde cozen Mathew Hutton, Esq. these.

<Q HUT 1633 THBOWES>
<A THOMAS BOWES>
<G M>
<P 320>
[} [\LETTER CCI.\] THOMAS BOWES TO MATTHEW HUTTON.}] [^TO
MATTHEW HUTTON, ESQ.^]
[\5 June, 1633.\]
   Sir, I have but relation of Sir George Bowes' busines,
concernynge which, as he says, is this: he hath payed, as he
reports, 1200=li= of the money, and had the rest there readye to
paye; of which summe my nephew Thomas Delavale brought 700=li=
from his sister-in-lawe, with direction from her to bringe it
againe; for, Sir George Bowes not havinge credite to procure the
whole summe, he and his ladye went to Seaton, and dealt there
with his sister Barbarye for 700=li= until Pentecost, and that
she shoulde have securitye out of Bradley to have her money
repayed then. After this he writt agayne to his sister-in-law
not to fayle him at the tyme, for that she shoulde have her
money returned agayne; whereupon she sent the money with her
brother, my nephew Thomas Delavale, and I thinke the whole summe
was tendred: but, M=r=. Eurye having some speach with Mr.
Delavale, yt was perceived that the 700=li= must not be payed:
whereupon the Lady Eurye broke off, and woulde doe nothinge
without all her money. M=r=. Delavale was laboured both by Tobye
and John Ewbanke to lend yt untill Pentecost, and they would
then repaye; but he would not goo from her direction. Sir George
did promise securitye
<P 321>
out of the land; and, when the deed came to be seene, yt is
sayde that land was to passe in Sir George Bowes' sonne's name.
Soe all is wronge there. John Ewbanke hath an estate, as yt is
said, of Cleatlam, and haith his goodes there; and Sir George
Bowes is glad to take some part of yt of him, and the house. He
is now at Newcastle; and yt seemes he thinkes his money will
never have an end, for he is making matches with the lordes of
horse-courses, and, as we heare, hath made 2 matches, the one
for 40=li=, thother for 100=li=; soe that wee feare he will make
an end of all soone: and yt is given out that they intend to goe
and live at London at Michaelmas, and live there upon the
interest of their money. I heare the Ladye Eurye is cuttinge
down such wood as there is there, and Sir George Bowes sent to
forbid them; but this forbiddinge will take noe place: so that
wee see noe good to be doone for him, yf he cannot gett yt by
lawe.
   In good fayth, I could not tell you any thinge touchinge my
brother Warcop's performance with you, neyther knew I any thinge
of his abilitye; and seldom do I see him.
   Yo write that yo have sent me the bill of charges touchinge
the judgment to Christ. Peacock. I asked your man yf he had any
other writinge to me than your lettre, and his answer ys that he
hath none: soe that I have see noe such note. Your tenant
Parmely had a cowe driven by baylies. As for my contempt, when I
was at York, I caused the court to be sought, and noe such
thinge is there to be found against me; and the truth is, I
never had a lettre served upon me wherbye suche contempts should
accrue: so that I thinke yo may have a very good amendes of the
bailyes; for, yf it had bene soe that I had beene in contempt,
they must take my owne goods for it, and not an other's. I shall
disburse none to drawe your fine, but both I and my sonne will
perform what is ryght to be doone yf the fine be accordinge to
Sir George Bowes' deed for the demaine. Thus in hast I have
written yo an answer to all your enquiries, soe well as I can;
but the truth is, wee of Streatlam are mere strangers to Sir
George Bowes' businesses. And soe, commendinge my love to yo, I
rest
   Your assured lovinge uncle,
   Thomas Bowes.
   June the 5=th=, 1633.
   To the Right Worshipful my assured lovinge nephew, Mathew
Hutton, Esq., at Maske, theese be dd.



<B LEYCESTE>

[^CORRESPONDENCE OF ROBERT DUDLEY, EARL OF LEYCESTER, DURING HIS
GOVERNMENT OF THE LOW COUNTRIES, IN THE YEARS 1585 AND 1586. ED.
BY BRUCE, JOHN. CAMDEN FIRST SERIES 27. 1844.^]

<Q LEY 1585 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 4>
[} [\LETTER I. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 26TH SEPTEMBER, 1585.\] }]
   My verry good lord, her majestie sent me woorde by M=r= Da
[^EDITOR HAS NOT IDENTIFIED THE ABBREVIATED NAME^] that I shoold
speak unto your lordship that her plesure is you forbeare to
proceed in your preparatyons untyll you speake with her. How
this commethe abowt I know not. The matter is to be kept
secreat. Thes chaynges here may woorke somme sooche chaynges in
the Lowe Contrye as may prove irreparable. God give her majestye
an othur mynde and resolution then in proceadyng otherwyse yt
wyll woorke bothe hers and best
<P 5>
affected subiects ruine. And so I most humbly take my leave. At
the courte, the 26. September, 1585.
   Your lordships to command,
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1585 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 5>
[} [\LETTER II. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 27TH SEPTEMBER, 1585.\] }]
   Sir,
   I have this night, at j a clok, received your letter, which
doth signyfie that her majesties pleasure ys, I shuld stey my
preperations untyll I doe speake with her. I wyll lett you knowe
how farr I have gonne, and than I shall obey hir majesties
comandment, being knowen from you, for stey of the rest, and to
undoe of that ys donn, as hir wyll shalbe.
   First; uppon hir first order geven, both from hir self and
also confirmyd further by your letters by hir majesties
comandment, I dyspached, betwene Thursday night and yesternight
iiij a cloke, above ij=c= lettres to my servaunts, and sondry my
frends, to prepare themselves, according to the order I had my
self, with all the spede the could possible, to serve hir
majestie, under me, in the Low Countreys. I am sure ther be a c
of these alredy delyvered, and the rest wylbe before I can
revoke them; having apointed the xviij. and xx. of the next
month for ther repayr hether with
<P 6>
all ther furnyture. I have since, and before I cam my self to
the Tower, taken upp both armours and stele saddelles, as many
as must cost me a good pece of money. I have sett in hand sondry
furnytures also for my self. I have taken upp ij or iij vessells
to carry away presently certen provissions, as bear and other
necessaryes, which must be ther before me.
   And, lastly, that I am most sorry for, the states that were
at court cam hether to me this morning by ix a cloke, and spent
ij owres with me, touching my dyspach, in so much as they werr
reddy to knele to me for to make what hast for my none aryvall
on the other syde that I could possibly, yea by all perswasions
pressing me that I wold not stey tyll my full preparations werr
made, and my companyes, but to be knowen once to be aryved at
Mydelborow, or Flushing, with such as may sonest be reddy, for
by that meanes I shuld be the cause of stey of greter matters
than wold be wyshed thorow longer delay, for, they sayd, yt was
very long alredy. They offerd me with all, that many things
shuld be ther made reddy to receave me, even so sone as yf I
went within vj days I shuld be prepared for. I did, hereuppon,
tell them what streyt comandment I had received from hir
majestie to hast me over, and what good wyll they shuld now fynd
in me to performe the same. We agreed that I shuld send som
servant of myne to have ther lettres over to se all things made
ther reddy for me, yf I shuld followe within 14 or 15 days; I
dyd so, and sent D. Doyly, whome ye know, who hath ther lettres,
and, except my messenger find him, he ys gonn this morning tyde
before iij a cloke; yet have I, uppon the sight of your lettre,
sent one to seke him and to stey him. This farr alredy have I
proceded. I told the states, also, that I steyd hereabout tyll I
shuld prepare for my owne speedyer dyspach.
   Whereuppon this sudden change doth groe, M=r= secretary, I
<P 7>
can not imagin, nether wyll I meddell withall, but must obey her
majesties pleasure yf she have determyned any alteration, which
I desyer to hear from you, for yf I com to the court yt must
more easyly breake out, as yt wyll notwithstanding, and I can
but greve at the myserable estate of the pore aflycted; as for
my owne, hit must be as the potters vessell, &c.
   For that I know this forenoon some of the estates wyll com
ageyn to me about this cause, I wylbe absent somwhear tyll after
none, by which tyme I wyll hope to receive further dyrectyon
from you, which God grant to be best for her majesties own
servyce and hir realme, by whose wysdom and government we are
all lyke ether to stand or faule. Thus in much hast, praing you
to excuse the imperfectyon of yt, being scrybled in my bed this
Monday morning almost ij a clok.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To the right honourable M=r= secretary
Walsingham, hast, hast, hast.

<Q LEY 1585 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 7>
[} [\LETTER III. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 27TH SEPTEMBER, 1585.\] }]
This ys one of the strangest dealings in the world. I find yf
<P 8>
any lytle stey be longer, the alteration on the other syde wylbe
past remedy. They ar so importunatt uppon me as I was feyn to
promys them to be reddy my self to goe within xv days. I have
don as I have wrytten, both in dyspach of my lettres and taking
upp of the other necessaryes, which comes to no smale som, and
now, was I in my money matters, and have my frends abrode for
yt! What must be thought of such an alteration! For my parte, I
am wery of lyfe and all. I pray you let me hear with spede. I
will goe this morning to Wansted, to se som horses I have ther,
where I wyll tary tyll iij a clok, and than retorn hether ageyn,
and, yf the matter alter, I can have no hart to com at court, or
look uppon any man, for yt wylbe thought some myslyking in me
doth stey the matter. Send Philip to me, and God kepe you, and,
yf you can possible, lern out the cause of this change.
   Your assured,
   R. L.

<Q LEY 1585 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 8>
[} [\LETTER IV. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 27TH SEPTEMBER, 1585.\] }]
   My verry good lord, I wyll not fayle to acquaynt her majestye
with the great compforte your lordship tooke thorrough her
<P 9>
grateowse dealyng towardes you, at sooche time as she dyd
delyver her plesure unto you towching the imployment of you in
the Lowe Contryes.
   My lords have semed to be verry wyllyng to further any thinge
your lordship shall require for the advauncement of the servyce.
But yf your lordships requests shall mynister matter of charge,
thowghe yt be for publycke servyce, the impedyment wyll be
fownde in her majestye, with whom I have had verry sharpe
conflyctes abowt the Scottyshe causes, and all for charges.
   I wyll excuse your lordships absence in respecte of the
necessytye of your being at London for the better expedytyon of
your preparatyons. Sir Amyas Paulet proceaded forther in the
preparatyons at Chartley then I lookd for. I wyll doe what I can
to staye the intended remove thither, but I feare neyther ser
Wat. Ashetons howse, nor Gyffordes, wyll be founde so apt. I
wyll cause a sayll to be made of the felling of the quenes
woodes, and of the used of hir stuffe.
   I fynde by the comyssyoners that they desyre greatly your
presence on the other syde the seae, for that they dowbt, in
respect of the present confusyon of governement, and the
practyces in hand to drawe them to gyve eare to the prince of
Parma, ther may faule owt somme dayngerowse alteratyon in thos
contryes.
   I knowe your lordship wyll make what speed you may, and yf
your good wyll myght have taken place, the daynger they feare by
delaye had ben avoyded.
   I wyll doe my best indevor to see your lordship somme tyme to
morrowe, or next daye, at your howse in London, and so, in the
<P 10>
meane tyme, I most humbly take my leave. At the courte the
xxvij=th= of September, 1585.
   Your lordships to command,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
I woold be glad to undarstande whether your lordship hathe had
sir Thomas Cicell in remembraunce. 
[\ADDRESSED.\] To the right honorable my very good lord the
earle of Leycester.

<Q LEY 1585 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 10>
[} [\LETTER V. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM.\] }]
   Sir, I doe not meane to make any request that shall encreace
any neu chardge, albeyt hir majesty, I trust, shalbe well
provided to have hir own chardges saved in the end. You know
what my sutes ar lyke to be, only to se me go accompanyd with
such suffycyent
<P 11>
persones as shalbe requysytt in so weighty a servyce as this ys.
And herein, good Mr. secretary, stand fast to me in dede; for I
wyll seke nothing, by my jorney, in this world, but to doe
servyce to hir majestie and this realme, and nothing I am in
sure hope wyll hinder yt but letting me from such able persons
as I shall desyer. I gave my nephew Philip this morning som
notes to conferr with you about.
   I hope, sir, I may have that I made you acquantyd with v or
vj c of my owne tenauntes, whom I wyll make as good reconing of
a[{s{] of 1000 of any that ar yet gonn over, and no way to
encreace hir majesties chardges, and whan I shall speak with
you, which I much desier, I wyll further satysfye you.
   Sir, my lord of Hunsdon hath sent his comandment, uppon his
sonn Hobbyes informacion, for a bayly of Hersam, who had a book
concerning ther own lybertyes and myne also, delyvered them by a
stuard of myne only for a tyme to pleasure them, and now they
have retornyd the booke ageyn to my offycer, and my lord, he
sends, wyll comytt him for yt, but I trust that justyce wyll not
be, for I must rather inform hir majesty; and this being the
truth of the cause, I pray you, sir, help to kepe the pore man
from prison, as I know yf you send to my lord that the party
hath opened the cause to you, I know he wyll forbear him. I am
<P 12>
loth to have squares with him now. God kepe you, and so I rest
your assured,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honorable good frend Mr. secretary
Walsingham.

<Q LEY 1585 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 21>
[} [\LETTER XI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO LORD BURGHLEY. 5TH
DECEMBER 1585.\] }]
   My very good lord, I am sorry I could not take my leave of
you before my departure, but I hard, which I am sorry for, that
<P 22>
your lordships paines encreaced after my going from the court,
and dyd lett your intended coming to London; but, seing that
oportunyty taken away, I have thought yt my parte to byd your
lordship fare well by these fewe lynes, whearin I shall wyshe
your lordship perfect health, and many yeres to serve hir
majesty, comending you for the same to the mightye protectyon of
the Lord.
   My good lord, I may not, having this occasion, be unmyndfull
of these thinges also, which I did think at my leave taking to
have remembred to your lordship, albeyt I know the care you
always have of hir majesties good servyces. Your lordship can
not but remember the cause for which hit hath pleased hir
majesty to send me into the Low Countreyes. Hit was not only by
your lordship, but by the hole nombre of councellors agreed
uppon, how mete and necessary hit was for hir highnes to yeld
ayd and assistance for the relyfe of those aflicted countreys,
her neghbours and most auncyent frendes: hit hath grown synce to
nerer termes and resolucyons, aswell by hir majesties own wordes
of comfort to them, as by contractes sett down betwen hir and
them, by hir majesties comyssioners apointed for the purpose. I
trust, my good lord, now that I have taken this voyage uppon me
to serve hir majestie as she hath commanded, your lordship will
be myndfull of me, poore man, but of the cause comytted now to
my delinge chifely.
   Albeyt I have no mystrust but in so great absence, and such a
servyce, I might greatly relye uppon your partyculer good wyll
and regard of my self, but in this case I desier no respect nor
regard of me, but of the cause, which I besech you, my lord, I
may at this farewell recomend to your wysdome and great care.
Hit cannott be but whatsoever lack shall happen to me in this
servyce, but the want must turn to hir majestie; and, as ther
can
<P 23>
no good, or honor, fall to this actyon, but yt must be wholy to
the prayse and honour of hir majestie, so whatsoever disgrace or
dyshonor shall happen (growing for lacke of our good
maintenaunce) but yt wyll redownde to hir majestie also. Hir
majestie, I se, my Lord, often tymes doth fall into myslyke of
this cause, and sondrye opinions yt may brede in hir with all,
but I trust in the Lord, seing hir highnes hath thus farr
resolvyd and groen also to this farr executyon as she hath, and
that myne and other mennes pore lyves and substances ar
adventured for hir sake, and by hir comaundement, that she wyll
fortefie and mainteyn hir owen actyon to the full performance of
that she hath agreed on. Than shall ther be no dowbt, but
assured hope, of all good success, to the glorye of God and
perpetuall honour to hir majestie.
   My good lord, you may conceave my meaning without more wordes
used to you, and the rather for that I desiered Mr. secretary to
imparte a lettre to yow I wrote to him. I besech your lordship
have this cause even to your hart, as yt doth appear yow have
donn by consentynge to the adventure of your eldeth sonne in
this servyce; for this I must say to you, yf hir majesty fayle
with such suplye and maintenance as shalbe fytt, all she hath
donn hetherto wylbe utterly lost and cast away, and wee hir pore
subiectes no better than abiectes. And, good my Lord, for my
last, have me only thus farr in your care, that in these thinges
which hir Majesty and yow all have agreed and confirmed for me
to doe, that I be not made a metamorphocys, that I shall not
know what to doe.
   And so the Lord have you in his keping, preserve hir majestie
for ever, and send me good spede in this servyce. In som hast
this 5th of December, on my way to the sey syde;
   by your lordships assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   My lord, no man feleth comfort but they that have cause of
<P 24>
grefe, and no men have so much nede of relyfe and comfort as
those that goe in these dowbtfull servyces. I pray you, my lord,
help us to be kept in comfort, for we wyll hazard our lyves for
yt. 
[\ADDRESSED.\] To the right honourable my very good lord, the
lord Burley, lord treasurer of England.

<Q LEY 1585 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 24>
[} [\LETTER XII. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 6TH
DECEMBER 1585.\] }]
My very good lord, I have receaved your courtess [^MS BURNT^]
letter, wherein your lordship doth commend to me your honorable
ca [^MS BURNT^] that your state and service now in hand doth
require, whereof truly, my lord, I do assure yow, no less a
portion of my care and travell for many respects to the
furtherance of your own honor than if I war a most neare kynsman
in bloode; and for the avancement of the action, if I should not
with all the powers of my hart contynually both wish and work
avancement therunto, I war to be an accursed person in the sight
of God; consideryng the endes of this action tend to the glory
of God, to the savety of the queens person, to the preservation
of this realme in a perpetuall quietnes, wherin for my
particular interest, both for my self and
<P 25>
my posterite, I have as much interest as any of my degree. And
this I pray yow, my lord, mak a perfect accompt of me and for my
doyngs. I referr the report to Mr. secretary, who hath this
afternoone hard me, in most ernest sort, dell with hir majesty
to favor and maynteane you and your action, as the only meanes
at this tyme to bryng hir to savety.
   From my couch in my chamber, not yet hable to rise from it.
God send your lordship a spedy good passadg. This vi. of
December, 1585.
   Your lordships assured as any,
   W. Burghley.
 
<Q LEY 1585 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 25>
[} [\LETTER XIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 15TH DECEMBER 1585.\] }]
   Sir, I have not the contract which passed betwene hir majesty
and the states, which you promysed me I shuld have, and of
necessyty I must nedes have yt sent to me, and, yf yt may be,
the
<P 26>
very oryginall ys best, whearatt ther handes be; you may cause
the coppye to be exemplyfied yf ye lyst.
   I have also perused the rates for the armye, which you sent
me by Lloyd my secretarye, wherein you sett down my rate as
generall without my ordynary company, as a gard, phisytyon,
chaplen, clerkes, drom, fyfe, and such lyke, as other
lyvetenauntes had, and as you dyd delyver me before, at the
beginning; for all other great offycers, as marshall and such
lyke, you told me yt must be alowed by this countrey chardges;
which I meane to deale accordingly, &c.
   You sett doun all Mr. Kyllegrew and Mr. D. Clerk lx=s= a pece
(\per dyem\) , which ys more than the governors of Flushing and
Bryall have, and, as I remember, you told me that their
allowance shuld be xl=s= a pece. I pray you lett me be answered
of these iij matters with as much spede as may be.
   My laste is, to hear from you as ofte as may be, and to take
ordre for your ordynary passenger on that syde, and to lett me
hear how hir majesty acceptes of my doinges and wrytinges.
   The longer the winde doth holde our shipps the more occasion
I shall howerly have to wryte. The greatest of all ys, first, to
pray you to gett hir majestys favor that I may have vj=c=. or a
1000 of your Iresh idell men, such as be not only in her
majestyes pay but very mete to be out of that countrey. The
cause of my desier to have them ys, for that they be hard, and
wyll abyde more pains than our men, tyll they have byn well
trayned with hardnes as they have byn. My desier only ys, that
hir majesty wryte a letter to my lord deputye to gyve such leave
to come as he shall not imploye ther, and to further the beror
that ys sent thether in all reasonable sort for his conveying
and transportacion of them, without any chardge to hir majesty.
Herein ye shall [\do\] hir majesty very great servyce, for I
assure you ther be many dedd of
<P 27>
our souldyeres, and the enymye hath contynevall intellygence
from us, only they think I have brought a mervelous suply, by
the nomber of vesselles that cam over with me, and the rest that
went into Holland, thinking my company ther and her ys not under
iiij=m= at least. Ther be tyckettes also sent from London hether
which no dowbtes past to the enymye quykly, and wyll doe no
hurt, setting done the names of such as com with me, wherein
there ys ij=c=. names of my none gentlemen sett down, and they,
hearing I have so many gentlemen in my company, imagyn they are
not without servauntes, and so owr nomber must be great; which
opinion hath doon no harm, but yet yt wyll not long hold, and
therfore, I pray you Mr. secretary, ether gett me this suply or
elles 6 or 700 at the least out of England, to fill up our
bandes, elsewyse you wyll be sorry to hear of the want and
dyshonor that ys lyke to follow.
   Ther ys an other matter which I wold gladly be asuered of; I
wrote yt in an other lettre, touching the allowance of the
souldyer, at what rate he shalbe payd, whether after viij=d= the
day stirling, or after Flemysh money, which maketh much adoe
here.
   For our selues here, also, I trust you wyll remember, you
ther may hereafter have cause to fele that we doe, and shall
doe; therefore doe as you wold be done unto.
   Ther ys a pore matter of my none I left with you, Mr.
secretary, which ys, a byll for ij leases, an ordinary matter,
and I wyll pay for them; but my chefe care ys, there ys a
statute of forfeture uppon yt of iij.=m= li., or ij=m=. li. at
least, yf yt be not gotten before Crystmas day and delyvered to
the party. I dyd once tell you of yt, as also comandyd Tho.
Dudley to inform you therof; I pray you, sir, doe me the favor
to dyspach yt, or yf hir majesty think you styll to partyall
toward me, I pray you desier and beseche certeyn to do yt; yt
standeth me so much uppon me as I tell you.
   I wrote somwhat of sir Aldagond to you in putting his case;
but this ys certeyn, I have the coppy of his very letters sent
hether to
<P 28>
practyce the peace not ij days before I cam, and this day one
hath told me, that loves him well, that he hates our countreymen
unrecouerably. I am sorry for yt. So the Lord kepe you this
Wenysday the xv. of December.
   Your loving frend,
   R. Leycester.
   I pray you, sir, lett me know whether I shall have sir
Wylliam Pellam, or no; for I hear he sayth he dowbteth now whan.

<Q LEY 1585 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 28> 
[} [\LETTER XIV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO LORD BURGHLEY. 17TH
DECEMBER 1585.\] }]
My very good lord, the love and affection that I finde in this
people of Middelbourch to my souveraigne, and the good will and
desier they shewe to do me honour for her majesties sake, do the
rather persuad me to recommend unto your good lordship a cause
of certain merchantes of this towne, towchinge a ship of
Vlussingue that was loaden with oyles and cottens, and bond for
New Haven, but mett by the way, in their course, by three
Englishe shippes, and by them taken, and carried into England.
This was donn within these fifteene dayes; but because the
marchantes have one their that doth follow and solicite the
cause, and will wayte upon your lordship to impart the
particulars hereof unto you, I will not troble you therwithall.
I hartely praye your good lordship to
<P 29>
shewe them your good favour for the releasing of their shippe,
and recovering of their goods, and the rather at my earnest
request unto your lordship, for which you shall allwaies find me
very thankefull in all I maye. I am now here amongst them, where
I wold be very glad to requite their good wille, and to
contynewe their affection, by accomplishing their reasonable
requestes, and therfore once againe I am bold to put your
lordship in mynd of my request. Thus leaving your good lordship
to God, who send you as well and as good health as to my self, I
end. At Middelbourgh, this xvij=th= of December 1585.
   Your lordships ever assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To the right honorable my very good lord, the
lord Burghley, lord high treasurer of England.

<Q LEY 1585 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 29>
[} [\LETTER XV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 26TH DECEMBER 1585.\] }]
Mr. secretary, albeyt I wrote lately to you from Dordrick,
having
<P 30>
thes convenyent messengeres, who doth meane to goe presently
into Englande, I wold [\not\] lett them pass without letting you
know where I am, and how greatly hir majesty ys in all places
reverenced and honored, of all sortes of people, from hiest to
the lowest, assuring themselves alredy, now they have hir
majestyes good countenance, to beatt all the Spanyards out of
their countrey ageyn. Never was ther people I think in that
jollyty that these be. I could be content to loose a lymme that
hir majesty dyd se these contreys and towens as I have; she wold
than think a hole subsedye well spent, but only to have the good
assurance and commandment of a few of these townes. I think ther
be not the lyke places agayn for England to be founde. I am now
going to the Hage, whear I shall have matter to wryte to hir
majesty shortly. In the meane tyme I meane not to trowble hir
majesty with any lettre, having written from Dort also unto hir.
   Thys sute I am to recomend unto you most ernestly. Ther ys a
gentleman, one Jacob Muys Van Holy, who ys one of the ablest men
in all these partes to serve hir majesty, both for his credytt
and wysedome. He hath a sonne prisoner with the enymye, and very
yll used. He besought me, yf ther were any Spanyard taken among
our seamen, as he heareth ther ys, he wold be a proude man to
have him, or any, to redeme his sonne, for they wyll not sett
him at any ransom, for the hate to his father; who in dede hath,
by his credytt, donn notable service in this cause, and no man
better able at this day to serve her majesty. I assure you, in
my opinion, hit were a good tern to bestow Seburo uppon him, and
yt ys my sute; I know it shall doe more good with all than xx=m=
crowns in money. He ys chefe bayly of Dordryght, where they have
ij=m= and iiij=c= able soldyers
<P 31>
of the very townes men as ever I saw in any place, and the
kindest people; beside there ys belonging above ij=m= maryners
to this town alone. I assure you yf such a parte might com to
him uppon the sudden, with a letter of thankes to the hole towne
besides, for ther honorable usage of me, hir majesties
lyvetenant here, you shall wynn her more frends withall thorow
all this countrey than a c Spanyardes be worth.
   I must besech hir majesty, also, that ther may be partyculer
letters wrytten of thankes to those towns who have so honorably
and chargeably receaved me in hir majesty's name, as Dordryght,
Rotradame, and this towne Delf, which ar all iij notable fair
towns, and all trafyquers with England. Flushing and Mydelborow
had letters, which makes me the bolder to craye these. The worst
of these towns presented me with xv=c= shott and armed men, at
the least, and dyd conduct me from town to town with vj and
vij=c= shott.
   This town ys an other London almost for bewty and fairnes,
and have used me most honorably, as these berors can tell you;
with the greatest shewes that ever I sawe. The mett me along the
ryver as I cam, v=c= shott ij myles of; at my landing ther was
not so few as xv=c= shott more, standing in a row from my
landing tyll I cam to my lodging, which was nere a long myle; by
the way, in the great merkett place, they had sett a squadron,
at the leaste of viij=c= or a 1000 pikes, all armyd, which was a
mervellous fayr sight, and tall able personages as ever I saw.
Ther was such a noyse, both here, at Rotradame, and Dordryght,
in crying, "God save queen Elisabeth," as yf she had ben in
Chepesyde, with the most harty countenances that ever I sawe;
and therfore, whatsoever hath byn sayd to hir majesty, I beleave
she never bestowed hir favor uppon
<P 32>
more thankfull people than these countryes of Holland; for the
states dare not but be queen Elyzabethes, for, by the lyving
God, yf ther shuld fall but the least unkindness, thorow ther
default, the people wold kyll them, for these towns woll take no
dyrectyon but from the queen of England, I assure you; and yf
hir majesty had not taken them at this nede, but forsaken them,
she had lost them for ever and ever, and now hath she them, yf
she wyll kepe them, as the cyttysens of London, in all love and
affectyon.
   All our horses, that have byn uppon the water at London and
here above xxvj days, ar as well aryved as yf they had never byn
travelled, and not so fayr when they wer shipt as they be now.
   Lastly, sir, I besech send me a pursevant; he that I
apointed, and desyered to goe, made sute a day before I cam away
to tarry at [{home,{] with xx excuses, his name ys Segar. I prey
you, sir, lett some one, and an able boddy, be apointed with
spede. Yf you call for clarencius he wyll name some fytt man to
you. I have great nede of such a one. Yf he have French, or
Duch, or Latyn, yt shall suffyce.
   I perceave not only these people here dowbtyd of hir majesty
dealing thus with the king of Spayn, but the princes of Germany
also, of whome one yesterday hath told me, that they know alredy
of my coming, and so mervell at yt as he thinkes her majesty
shall fynd them in an other tune than ever she found them yet;
shortly I shall hear more, and, uppon this, yf the matter of
Segaro werr satysfyed touching Cassamere, she wold shortly
dyrect them all. I speak yt not for any respect for my self (God
ys judge), but you wyll not beleave what a reputacion this
dealing in the Low Countreys hath alredy gotten hir.
   I have most cause to complayn, that was sent out as I was,
and yet stand, without help, or assistance, of such persons as I
hoped for. I hear nothing of Sir William Pellam, nor Mr.
Kylligrew,
<P 33>
and, for my parte, yf I lak them one weke longer, I had as leave
the taryed styll, for now am I at the worst, even at the first;
for now wyll all the busynes be: yt were to much pytty to lose
so great good thinges for lack of some help at the first. Yf yt
were not for Mr. Davison I shold be very farr to seke, God
knows.
   I find no great stuffe in my lytle colleage, nothing that I
looked for. Yt ys a pytty you have no more of his profession
able men to serve. This man hath good wyll, and a pretty
skollers wytt; but he ys to lytle for these bygg felloues, as
heavy as hir majesty thinks them to be. I wold she had but one
or ij such as the worst of half skore here be.
   I find Ruddykyrke a very grave, wyse, honest man; now, in the
fayth, he confesseth, he was almost out of belefe of hir
majesties goodnes. Walke dealeth most honestly and painfully.
Paule Buys I find greatly envyed and myslyked; but he must nedes
be had, albyt all devyces ar used to putt him out from being a
councellor.
   Now a few wordes for St. Aldegonde. I wyll besech hir majesty
to stay hir judgement tyll I wryte nest. Yf the man be as he now
semeth, hit were petty to loose him, for he is in dede
mervelously frended. Hir majesty wyll think, I know, I am easily
pacyfied, or ledd, in such a matter, but I trust so to deall as
she shall gyve me thankes. He hath made my nephew and Mr.
Davison deall with me; he hath sent his sonn, also, to me, to
gyve him to me, but I forbare, tyll I had good advyce in dede,
to send one to him, which was Gilpyn, and doe looke every oure
to
<P 34>
hear from him agayn. Once yf he doe offer servyce yt ys sure
inough, for he ys esteemed that way above all the men in this
countrey, for his word yf he gyve yt. His most enymyes here
procure me to wynne him, for sure just matter for his lyfe ther
ys none. He wold fayn come into Englond; so farr he ys com
alredy, and doth extoll hir majesty for this work of hirs to
heaven, and confesseth, tyll now, an angell could not make him
beleave yt. Well, I hope you shall hear that wyll not myslyke
you hearin. Fare you well, this Sonday morning, at Delph.
   Your assured,
   R. Leycester.
   I never herd out of Englond yet synce I cam away.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honourable good frend sir Francis
Walsingham, knight, her majesties principall secretarie.

<Q LEY 1585 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 34>
[} [\LETTER XVI. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. DECEMBER, 1585.\] }]
   My verie good lord, your letters sent by Mr. Henrie Astell
and your servante Underhill, I have receaved, by the which I am
verie
<P 35>
gladd to understand that your lordship hath ben so honourably
used in those places where you nowe are, and that they stand so
greatlie devoted towardes her majestie as by all owtward shewe
dothe manyfestly appeare, which ought to move her majestie to
like the better of the actyon, and to countenance the same in
such sorte as maie both encourage your lordship and increase the
love and goodwill towardes her, of those well affected people.
But, as farre as I can learne by such of my frendes as are
acquainted with our court proceadinges, it wourketh not that
good effect that were to be wished, so unpleasant are all
thinges that mynister matter of charges. I praie God frame an
other minde in her majestie, as well for her owne honour and
safetie, as for the encouragement of such as are emploied in
publicke service.
   I am verie gladd that the promised contribution by the states
carrieth likelyhood of perfourmance, which stoppeth the mouthes
and practises of those that sought to wourke an other conceipt
in her majestie, by bearinge her in hand that she was abused,
and that the burthen of the charges would light uppon her, or at
least that she should in the ende be forced, in respecte of
charges, to geve over the cause. I would to God their meanes
might have ben found such as some parte of her owne charges
might have ben diminished, whereby she might have ben the rather
encouraged to have put on a resolution to have proceded
constantlie in the maintenance of the cause.
   As your lordship heareth out of Germanie that this enterprise
of her majesties hath greatlie encreased her reputation in those
partes, so do we here the like out of Italie, and I thincke
that, if they might stand assured that her majestie would
throughlie prosecute the cause, they might be drawne in some
sorte both to yeald supporte and to kyndell some fyer ther; so
necessarie do they find it that the king of Spaynes greatnes
should be abated in respect of their owne perryll.
   I perceave by your lordships letters that if you had not come
<P 36>
at that tyme you did, there would have fallen out some
dangerouse alteration in that countrie, and therefore all honest
and well affected subiectes here have cause to thancke God that
you arrived there so seasonablie as you did; for, houesoever we
mislike of the enterprise here, all England should have smarted
if the same had not ben taken in hand.
   If the princes of Germanie could be drawne to congratulate
your lordships repayre into those partes, as your lordship is
put in hope they will doe, it will greatlie countenance the
cause.
   Touchinge your lordships request to have Sebur gewen in
exchange for the bayliffe of Dortrechtes sonne, I will doe my
uttermost endevor to bringe the same to effecte, wherein I hope
there wilbe found no great difficulty, for that his releasement,
beinge a man of no great capacitie thoughe otherwise
malliciouslie affected, can wourke no great preiudice to this
estate.
   This daye, I understood by Mr. vice-chamberlaine, who came to
vissitt me, that her majesties mislikes towardes St. Aldegonde
contynuethe, and that she taketh offence that he was not
restrained of his libertie by your lordships order. I did
acquainte him with the letter he wrote unto your lordship, which
carryinge a true picture of an afflicted mynde, cannot but move
an honest harte, weyinge the rare partes the gentleman is endued
withall, but to pittie his distressed estate, and to procure him
releif and comforte, which Mr. vice-chamberlaine hath promised
on his parte to perfourme. I thought good to send St. Aldegondes
letter unto the lord threasurer, who heretofor hathe carryed a
harde conceipt of the gentleman, hopinge that the viewe of his
letter will breed in his lordship some remorse towards him. I
have also praied his lordship, if he see cause, to acquainte her
majestie with the said letter.
   Sorie I am that your lordship should have that iust cause you
<P 37>
have to complaine of lacke of assistance. There falleth out
daylie, as I am informed, newe discoverie of abuses touchinge
the office of the ordenance, as that there should be a hundred
brasse peeces missinge, which doth so much agravatt her
majesties displeasure against sir William Pelham, in that he did
neglect, with that care that appertained, to oversea the
inferiour officers, as she can hardely endure anie man to deale
for him. Yett, notwithstandinge, my lord threasurer hathe of
late sent the gentleman woordd, that he is nowe in some hoape
that her majestie wilbe content to extend some grace towardes
him, whereby he maie be sent unto your lordship, who canne never
come to late, in respecte of the contynuall use your lordship
shall have of his advice and assistance, so longe as you shalbe
emploied in those countries in a martyall coorse.
   Touchinge a coppye of the originall contracte that your
lordship writeth of, I am assured the same was delyvered either
to Mr. Atye, or to Mr. Fludde; in the meane tyme, until the same
maie be found, your lordship maie use a coppie I delyvered to
Mr. Killegrewe, who hathe been long at the seae syde for a
wynde.
   The allowance gewen to doctour Clarcke and Mr. Killegrewe is
mistaken by the writer, for that it ought to be onlie 40 (^s.^)
(\per diem\) . And, as touchinge your lordships allowance as
generall, it is true that the enterteinement due to all such
necessarie attendantes all other generalls have had, was
omitted. Your lordship therefore shall do well to write a joynte
letter to the lord threasurer and to me, to move the rest of the
counsell to geive warrant to the threasurer for the paiement
thereof.
   The letters of thanckes your lordship desireth unto the
townes of Dortrecth, Rotterdam, and Delft, I will not faile to
procure: as also that ther maie be provided a passage boate for
the transportation of letters.

<Q LEY 1585 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 38>
[} [\LETTER XVII. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 26TH
DECEMBER, 1585.\] }]
   My very good lord, sence the retorn of Mr. Gorge from your
lordship, who cam the next daye after his shippyng, we have not
hard from your lordship, nether I thynk hath your lordship hard
from hence; the lack of both hath bene in default of passages.
And now, as soone as any shippyng cold be made redy, which,
though I wryte these letters this Mo[\nday\] being the 26. yet,
untill Wednesday, the officers of the admyralte say, the
shippyng cannot be redy, and if it than shall be, I d[{oubt{] of
nothyng but want of wynd to bryng over to your lordship a gret
nombre of your good frendes and servantes, and amongst them my
son, who hath bene hable and redy these x dayes, if he cold have
gotten shippyng, which he cold not get untill your shippes
retorned.
   By Mr. Gorge and others I receaved two letters from you, the
on of the xj=th= the other of the xiij=th=, both wrytten at
Midelburg. By the former, your lordship signefyeth your saff
arryvall, and the perswasion that your coming hath wrought in
that nation of hir majesty's mynd to help them, wherof they war
in doubt afor. By the second, your lordship wryteth in what
state Sluse and
<P 39>
Ostend ar, and how much yow fynd above your formar opynion the
importance of those ij places ar for the service ageynst the
enemy, and therfor your lordship hath entred into consideration
how to releve ther wantes; wherin, in my opynion, I think your
lordship hath no on thyng, now at your first coming, mor
nedefull for avoyding of that danger, which, if it shuld happen,
will not be remedyed without gret charges and hazard. For I have
allweise thought, that ther was nothyng more nedefull for the
kyng of Spayn than to have mo and better places on Flanders syde
than he yet hath for shippyng, as well to send ayde of men,
mony, and victells, from Spayne, or from France by frendshipp,
as to kepe shippes of warr to offend all passengers betwixt
England and Zelland or Holland; as, by experience, the
possessyng of Dunkyrk haven hath served, with a few beggarly
vessells, to have done gret dammage by sea, presyng of men,
shippes, merchandise, and victells; and suerly, my lord, if
Sluse shuld be lost, the Spanyards might incress ther strength
by sea with shippyng hable to overmach both Flussyngars and a
good nombre of our shippes, for if the haven shuld be thers,
they might kepe as well j=c= sayle as x., and what cost will a
kyng of Spayn spare, to be a master on the sea, wher he now is
commanded? But I am to long herin, although I might wryte much
more; but I know and perceave by your lordships own wrytyng, yow
look depely into this matter, which in dede can not be to
spedely looked unto, that both these places he victelled,
manned, and ther weaknes also spedely strengthened, and, in my
opinion, the states ought, at this tyme, more largly to
contribut to this chardg than to a doosen of other towns in any
part of Holland, and therfor, good my lord, as you have begon to
take care hereof, so procure the states to yeld monny
plentifully, to pay a sufficient nombre there whylest the
imperfections of the places may be reenforced, and than the
<P 40>
nombers may be the fewar afterward. I wold to God that your
lordship cold procure such a releff, as ether of those ij towns
might have but j=c= horsmen, who, joyning togither, might ether
spoyle the country, or might cause the ennemy bryng a great
force to that frontyer, wherby ther own nombres shuld also
dammag ther own towns, as Bruges, Newport, &c. by reason of ther
lack of victells.
   Mr. Wylford wrote a letter to Partridg of Kent, to help send
hym some victells, and therwith he sent a letter of your
lordship to the commissioners of Kent, and so I have procured
letters from the counsell to the commissioners, to authorise on
Mr. Avyer to send it over, with bond to have it saffly sent,
wherof Mr. Brown your lordships servant is by me made prive.
   Your said servant also required my warrant for sendyng of
ce[{rtain{] victell uppon your lordships letters wrytten to hym,
and I was v[{ery{] willyng so to have doone of myn own
authorite, but I am otherwise directed by a warrant signed by
hir majesty afor your lordship departed, wherof, it is sayd,
that your lordship was prive; but it bredeth, in [\my\] opinion,
some hyndrance with the circumstances; for, first, it is by the
warrant apoynted, that your lordship must, first, by your
letters to me, signefy what quantite yow require, and than ther
must be an other letter procured from four of the counsell to
me, also, for allowance therof, and than am I authorised to gyve
warrant to the portes, but yet with condition that bondes must
be put into the chequer for the retorn of trew certificat from
that syde. With all these circumstances I am circumscribed more
than in former tymes hath bene thought necessary, but I fynd no
lack in that I am so directed, but sometyme ther will be
required more spede than this manner doth prescribe. Of this Mr.
Brown is now prive, and yet I have ventured to gyve hym warrant,
havyng also gotten a letter from the counsell, for such a
proportion as he required, which was, for j=m= quarters of
<P 41>
wheat, as much malt, j=c= ton of beare, xl bulloks, vj oxen,
j=c= shepe, vj barrells of tallow candells, a hoy with wood and
cole. And he sayth, he will wryte to your lordship to have yow
hereafter to signefy your mynd in particular wrytyng to me, for
such thynges as yow shall have nede, wherin I wish your lordship
caused accompt to be made of the charges of our prises, with
charges of transportation, with the lyk kyndes there to be had,
for I here report that manny thynges ar to be had ther with
easyer prices, and, of those thynges, I doot not but your
lordship will forbeare to require any provision from hence,
which will also be good for our country, wher, by collor of
these provisions, prises will ryse without reason.
   I heare also, my lord, that there is gret gayne made of our
coyn, both of gold and silvar ther, to the loss of our
countrymen uttryng the same for that country monnyes, and the
gayn sought by merchants both of that country and of England, by
choppyng and changyng therof under the trew vallew; for, in
truth, our monny, both gold and silver, is worth in eschange
above xxxiiij=s=. the pownd, and yet the marchant holdeth the
eschange but at xxxiij=s=. iiij=d=, and therfor, my lord, yow
may do a good dede to cause some honnest skillfull men to make a
trew assaye of the monnyes of that countrye, and rate both our
gold and silver at the same price, and to cause our people to be
well instructed at what prices they ought to utter our monnyes
for the monnyes of those con[{tryes{] . In this matter, I thynk
a servant of alderman Martyns, that went over with the tresorer,
can inform your lordship, or any of your counsell ther, what
order war to be taken.
   And I wish, also, that your lordship wold deale with the
counsell of the states for reformation of ther myntes, which,
being many in nombre, serve only by fraude to gayne to them that
ar the officers of the myntes, and to the decept of the people.
   Your lordship, also, is to be advertised, which I do by hir
majesties direction, that she understandeth very certenly, that
the king of Spayn maketh all the provision that he can possible,
to mak a
<P 42>
mighty navy for a great army to come by sea, to annoy hir
majesty, and, for the furniture therof, beside his own shippes
and gallyes, both of Spayne and Itally, in Millan, Naples, and
Sicilly, he is promised ayd of men and gallyes from the pope and
the dukes of Savoy and Florence, and, some report, from the
Venetians, but therof I dout, so as, in conclusion, it is here
found most necessary that hir majesty shall also make
preparation of all the strength that she can mak by sea, and,
for that purpooss, it is here resolved, that hir own shippes
shall be removed to Portesmouth in March next, and a gret nombre
of hir subjectes shippes shall also be made redy to come, ether
to Portesmouth, or to Plymmouth, or to other places in our west
partes, as, by further intelligence of the king of Spayns
preparations, shall be requeset. And for this purpooss hir
majesty thynketh it most nedefull that your lordship shuld
presently procure some persons of understandyng, such as here is
named, Mr. Nicholas Gorge, to repayre to the portes of Holland
and Zelland, ether with the pryvety of the states or without it,
as your lordship shall thynk best, and to attayn to a certen
knolledg of the nombre of shippes provisable for warre, as to be
about ij=c= tons or vij or viij=xx=, and of ther furnitur, and
what nombre of marrynors ar also in every port, and whyther any
nombre of marrynors might be had to be hyred, to help to supply
our lack that may happen in the queen's navy, wherof we have
cause to dowt, because of the gret nombre absent with Sir
Francis Drak, and abrod with our merchantes shippes being
adventurers, and after that your lordship shall have
understandyng hereof, than hir majesty wold have your lordship
to impart to the states, or to ther counsell, how and in what
sort hir majesty looketh to be this sommer, and that very tymly
in the
<P 43>
spryng, assayled by a gret army of the king of Spayns, and how
nedefull it is, that all meanes possible be used to have a navy
hable to withstand the same, and specially to impeach the
comming of this Spanish navy towardes those Low Countryes, for
which purpoos, as hir majesty will spare no chardg to arm hir
own navy to the seas, and hir subjectes also, which must prove
an unknowen chardg, so wold she have your lordship to exhort
them, accordyng to the necessite of this tyme, to put in order
spedely as gret a navy as maye be by them fully furnished, to be
redy to come to the narrow seas by the end of March, or the midd
of Aprill, if by the king of Spaynes hasty preparations hir
majesty shall be therto so spedely provoked. And though, by an
article of the treaty, they ar bound hereunto in a certain
quantite, as by the article wherof I send your lordship a copy,
(I know not whyther you have the same,) yet the tyme requiring
all help possible, to match with so puissant army as the king
prepareth, your lordship may with reason soll[{icit{] them to a
farder proportion, if it may be. And hir majesty is desyrous to
be advertised hereof with such spede as your lordship may
procure.
   Thus, my lord, consideryng Mr. Aty maketh hast to depart, and
I am as yet not so hable to wryte as I have bene, I pray your
lordship that I may mak an end, with my assurance to your
lordship that, in any thyng that in my power lyeth to plesure
you and furder your service, I will be as redy as any frend that
is here behynd yow. And to conclud, I hartely thank your
lordship for the trust you have committed to me joyntly with my
lord chancellor for your office of the forrest, but we must have
some directions from your lordship what to do, or els we shall
not know what to doo.
   I nede not wryte to yow of our common news here, because so
<P 44>
many come over at this tyme fully fornished with such matters.
From Grenwich, the 26th of December, 1585.
   Your lordships to be commanded,
   W. Burghley.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To the right honorable my very good lord the erle
of Lecester, lord [{lieutenant of{] the queens majestys forces
[{in the{] Low Countres of Holland, Zelland, &c. and of hir
majesty's prive counsell in England.

<Q LEY 1585 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 44>
[} [\LETTER XVIII. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 27TH
DECEMBER, 1585.\] }]
   My very good lord, whan I wrote my letters on Sonday, which I
do send by Mr. Aty, I wrote the same in hast, as I am forced by
multitude of causes to do allweis, but the rather because Mr.
Aty told me, that he wold come for them as yesterday, and
depart, which, fyndyng hym not to come, as I thynk by some
necessary lett, and havyng my sonn here redy to pass towardes
his shippyng, I have thought good to wryte a few thynges by hym.
   First, I am so assured, and my sonn also, of your lordships
honorable good will towardes hym, more than in common sort, as I
forbeare to wryte any more, but, breffly, to recommend hym to
your protection, and to wish [\him\] Godes grace to do as well
as I am sure your lordship will wish hym.
<P 45>
   My lord, now Mr. secretary being absent, I am occasioned to
deale with hir majesty in manny thynges, and suerly I am gretly
discoraged with lack of hir resolutions. For Mr. Pelham, I have
delt ernestly with hir majesty to dismiss hym with hir favor to
come thyther to your lordship, but hir majesty refuseth ether to
pardon hym, wherof he hath most nede, or to stall his dett,
which he also requireth, yea to take as much of his land as
resonably may satisfy his dett, so as he may, with the rest,
live and pay his other dettes, but hir majesty peremptorely
commandeth me to chardg hym to depart, and to hope uppon hir
favor at his retorne. Herwith he is so discontented as he
offreth rather to go to the Tower: in this hard terme his cause
resteth. Hir majesty sayth, he nede be at no chardg ther, for he
shall bot as a privat man attend on your lordship. I saye, I
thynk your lordship meaneth to mak hym marshall. She sayth, that
therin she will not deale, for she will charg hym with no
service, but only to attend on yow. In these termes is this
poore gentleman; and yet I will continew, with all importunite I
can, to obteyne hir majestys more favorable opinion of hym,
because I know how nedefull his service is to your lordship.
   Good my lord, serche the intention of the works in Antwerp by
the carpynters that work uppon shipps, in secret sort. I feare
ther is ment to mak some multitude of fatt botes to bryng people
into the flatt seas, to attempt Tergooss and Zyrecksea. Uppon
the purposs of the ennemy your lordship is to provyde some
conterwork to withstand such enterprises. I have hard that ther
ar manny papistes in Tergooss.
   And thus, the tyde callyng my sonn awey, maketh me and my
letter in hast. At Grenwych, 27 December, 1585.
   Your lordships at command,
   W. Burghley.

<Q LEY 1585 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 46>
[} [\LETTER XIX. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 31ST DECEMBER, 1585.\] }]
   Mr. Secretary, I cam hether to the Hay, uppon Monday last,
whear I was very honorably receaved, all the states being
assembled together for that purpose, to make as much shew as
they could devyse of their good wylles to hir majesty, as in
many orations, pagentes, and such lyke, was expressyd, besyde
the people with great joye cryed, "God save the quene, God save
the quene," in every place of the stretes as I passed.
   The next day all the hole states generall cam to me, and ther
openly ageyn ther chauncelor Leonius (some call him Longonius)
made a longe oratyon in thankes and prayses to the quenes
majesty for hir great clemency, bounty, and goodnes, shewyd to
these pore aflycted countreys; attrybuting all their good and
happines, under God, to hir majesty only. As sone as he had donn
than cam comyssioners from partyculer provinces, as from
Utrycht, Geldars, and Fresland, besides sondry spetyall towens,
as Ansterdam, Leydon, Auchuson, and others, all which must nedes
use ther gratulacion, with oratyons, as the other dede, and much
to the same effect all with thankes and prayse to hir majesty.
<P 47>
   At all this cerymony-doing was ther a French secretary, sent
hether v or vj [\days\] before with lettres from the king. He
sayd yt was about merchantes matters, but in dede contrary, only
to have impeched, yf he could, this bynding themselves to hir
majesty as they doe. But the states gave him no audyence all the
while, alleaging they were occupied about the servyce of the
quene of Englond, which they wold dyspach before all princes in
the world. This fellow, being present at all this solemne
dealing with me, tooke yt in such snuffe as he cam prowdly to
the states, and offred his letters, saing: "Now I trust you have
donn all your sacrafyces to the quene of Englond, and may yeld
me some leysure to rede my masters letters." They so shooke him
upp, and with such termes, naming hir majesty in skorn, as they
tooke yt, as they hurld him his letters, and bidd him content
himself, they wold first dischardge all the least dewtyes
whatsoever to hir majesty before they wold hear him. So they
have every day synce sett about the contract with hir majesty,
spetyally how to gyve me answere for hir full satysfaction
touching ther abyllytye to maynteyn ther warrs, whearin I hear
credybly hir majesty shalbe well satysfied, and further then any
of us looked for. And both roundlye and frankley they goe to
worke, that ye shall se they wyll doe indede more than ever they
promysed, considering her majestes denyall [\of\] the
souerauntye and name of protector. For they meane, and must doe
yt, for the hole people wyll have yt, that hir majesty shall
have in hir handes the hole bestowing aswell of ther money and
contrybucions as of ther men of warr; and the desire no longer
hir good favour to them than they shall deall in all sincerytye
with hir. Wherein yt apperes that all the comyssioners have
wonderfully sett fourth her majesty to them all here, and Paull
Buys hath donn his parte thorowly, so hath Walk also. And all
thinges alredy [{are carried on{] with the most unyversall
obedyence of hir majestys name that ever I sawe. And
<P 48>
flatly yt apperes now, they wyll no other authorytye but under
hir majesty, nor that their treasure nor lyves shalbe at the
dysposing of any but hir majesty, which, yf you saw that we se
here, ye would wonder at [\what\] these people doe, and ar able
to doe, and yf God had not moved hir majesty to send when she
dyd, the prince of Parma had byn by this tyme in the best and
greatest tounes they have; but ye shall hear others in this and
not me.
   And as I wrote before how hir majestyes dealinges here ar
alredy blowen into Germany, so this day the elector brought me
letters agayn newly com there, whereby they wryte most honorably
of hir majesty, and the duke of Sax geues much better eye than
he did, synce his wyfes death, and lyke to marry ageyn with the
hows of Hanalt, a great protestant and a great howse. He hath
sent to speak with Seiguro, and very lyke to joyn with the other
princes, who ar agreed, not only to send a messenger to the
French king, but to lett him know, that they will com to the ayd
of the king of Navare, who ys most iniuriously delt withall by
the practyce of the pope and king of Spayn. The ellector vowede
to me that they have donn more in these causes within this xx
dayes, synce they understood of her majesties resolucyon agaynst
the king of Spayn, aswell by Sir Francis Drakes going into the
Indyes as her sending into these countreys, than they have don
this x yeres, or wold have don this twelmonths yet. God send hir
majesty to think of his mercyfull dealinges accordingly. The
king of Denmark also hath joyned and encouraged greatly these
princes. Hit ys told me by the elector that dyvers of them meane
to send hether to me, to congratulate hir majestyes gracious
doings toward this countrey.
   I have no other nues tyll these states have fully ended ther
consultacions, which wylbe to morrow, as I hear, and wholy,
without contradyctyon, to be at the devotyon and dispocyon of
hir
<P 49>
majesty absolutly. Of this ye shall hear as sone as I shall know
ther further answere. Two of our men of warr of Flushing hath
taken ij Dunkirk men; one sonk and drouned all the souldyers and
maryners. Thus fare ye well, sir, this last of December.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   Hit ys sayd that the princes ar resolvyd to entreate
Cassymere to be generall, and shall have xxv=m= men levyed by
the princes to goe with him into France.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 49>
[} [\LETTER XX. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 3RD JANUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   Good Mr. secretarie. I had forgotten in my former letters to
send unto you theis letters which I therein mencioned, which I
presently send unto you herinclosed; and so committ you to the
blessed tuicion of the Almightie. From Leyden, this iij. of
Januarie, 1585.
   Your assured loving frend,
   R. Leycester.
[^POSTCRIPT AUTOGRAPH^]
   I leave yt to your self whether you think yt good hir majesty
se St. Aldagondys letter or no. I cam hether to Leydon whilst
the states ar fynyshing all thinges ageinst my retorn, which
wylbe to morrow: this ys a goodly town and very strong, and most
loving people. Cassimers letter ys not here.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To the right honourable my very good frend, sir
Francis Walsingham, knight, principall secretary to her majesty.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 50>
[} [\LETTER XXI. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 12TH
JANUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   My very good lord, though ther ar manny difficulties both for
your lordship ther, and for us here, to concurr to the
furderaunce of this noble necessary service under your chardg,
yet ther is no on thyng that more annoyeth the expedition than
the advers wyndes, that somtyme kepeth us from understandyng of
your procedynges, not many dayes but manny wekes; but, that most
greveth us, the contrariete also of the wyndes stayeth us from
sendyng to your lordship, not only of letters but of men, horse,
victells, and monny. Amongst which evill accidentes my son,
Thomas Cecill, feleth at this tyme the burden and greff therof,
as he shuld have bene less damnefyed with an agew of on or two
monthes. As soone as he had recovered his evill fate he went
towardes the sea syde, the secound day after Christmas daye,
shipped about lx horses and ij=c= foote men, besyde lx other
servantes and followers, about the tyme your lordships
secretary, Mr. Aty, went also as I thynk with some monny of your
lordships. Henry Killigrew, also,
<P 51>
and William Knolls and sir Thomas Parrot went anon after. All
these have lyne at Margat in Kent ever sence, to this 12. of
January, for any thyng that I can heir to the contrary, savyng
they have bene on to the seas three or four sondry tymes, and
put back, ether with chang of wyndes or lack of wyndes, and, at
this present, we have had these five or six dayes constant
esterly wyndes with frostes, so as I feare a longer contynuance
of the impedimentes, but hereof ther is no remedy. Whan God
shall please to send them passadg, your lordship shall of ther
own report here more particularetyes of ther incommodytes.
   My son feleth very gret charges herby, for, as he wryteth
hyther, victellis ar dearer wher he lyeth than at London, and,
as he thynketh, at the Brill. He kepeth at his chardg, with his
horses, his band of footemen being ij hundredth, and with his
howshold servantes, and dyvers gentillmen that accompany hym,
above iij=c= mouthes. If your lordship be not good lord to hym
for allowance, ether for wages or for charges of this
transportation, or rather, I may saye, of this retardation by
occasion of the lack of wyndes, he shall mak a shipwrack of his
jornaye; but I wryte not this to move your lordship to do more
than I knowe you will of your self consider what is mete, and
what you may doo.
   Now, my lord, I will leave this long preface, and come to
some matters in my former letters. Whan Mr. Aty went from hence
I wrote, that hir majesty was desyroos to have your lordship to
deale with the states to put ther navy in order to joyne with
hirs, which shall be at Portesmouth in March next. Hir majesty
also wold that your lordship shuld procure knolledg of the state
of ther shippes mete for warr in every of the portes, and what
nombre of marryners might be spared from thence, if the navy of
England shuld have nede therof, which we dowte of, because of a
gret nombre gon with Sir Francis Drake, from whom, sence he
departed from the cost of Spayn, we never hard word, nether do
we
<P 52>
look to here afor March. In lik sort, to your lordship to have
inquisition made in Antwerp to what purpooss the vessells war
made by a nombre of shipwryghtes that lately cam out of Itally,
from Janua. These thynges I do repete to your lordship, not
knowyng how my formar letters may come to your handes.
   Now the rest that shall follow ar of thynges not mentioned
before. The queens majesty hath yelded to procure a some of
monny to be on hir part redy at Frankforth, towardes the levy of
an army that, we hope, don Cassymyr will conduct into France,
for the releff of the king of Navarr and Christes flock ther
persequuted; hereof monsieur de Grytry, that cam from Germanny
afor your lordship departed, will inform your lordship.
   In Scotland, to outward apparance, all thynges procede well.
The kyng hath kept a parlement at Lythquoo, wher the lords that
war bannished ar restored to ther states, and ar by the kyng
cleared of the crymes imputed. He hath sent a gentleman of his
chamber, named Kyth, therof to advertise her majesty, and to
offer all frendship that he can to his power yeld to hir
majesty; he desyreth to have the leag that was begon to be
fynished. Arrayn, now called but James Stuard, lyveth on the
west seas, hoveryng ther, from whom the kyng requireth his
jewells, which he, at his fleyng away, took out of Edenburgh
castell, but he will not delyver them without a pardon to come
back, which is denyed, but with condition that he will appeare
to justyce, which he as yet declyneth. Mr. Randolf is to go to
the Scottish kyng, and so the treaty, as I thynk, shall go
forward. Tyme must trye these thynges, for we fynd that the
French kyng hath sent, by sea, a baron of France, the son in law
of Pynartes, a man of gret lyvyng but of lytle understandyng,
and therfor he hath a shrewd instrument with hym, called
Courselles, whom your lordship did, I
<P 53>
thynke, know here with Malvesyn, a notable servitor to the
Scottish quene and the house of Guise, and, addyng to this, that
we understand how Lyddyngton, the secretary in Scotland, and
Robert Melvyn, who both remayn in good creditt with the kyng, ar
devoted to the kinges mother and to France, we may dout of the
eventes.
   Sence the puttyng of our shippes in order ageynst March, it
was ment to have sent this next month ten shippes of warr,
wherof five of hir majesty's and five marchantes, to have lyne
uppon the cost of Spayn, to have impeached the coming togither
from sondry portes of ther victells and shippyng, and also to
have discovered the truth of the reportes of the gret
preparations of a Spanish navy and army, accompted for iij=c=
sayle of shippes and gallyes and nere to iij=xx= thousand men,
by meanes of the helps out of Itally, from the pope, the duke of
Florence, duke of Savoye, from Naples and Sicilly; but, lately,
advertisement is come out of Itally, that ther is no such
preparation made there, nether of men nor shippes, but whyther
we be duly advertised I am yet in dout. Nevertheless, I did
never thynk it lykly that any such nombres, ether of men or
shippes, cold be sett forth by the king of Spayn as was
reported, specially for want of victells for such a nomber; but
hir majesty, uppon this advertisementes, stayeth the sending
forth of the sayd ten shippes, but yet both they, and all the
rest of the navy, contynew ther equippage to be in Portesmouth
afor the end of March.
   Now, my lord, I will resort to a speciall matter, whereof hir
majesty hath sent me chardg to wryte sence I began this letter.
A gentleman of the duk of Bullyon, whom your lordship knoweth,
named de Sevilly, cam two dayes past to hir majesty from the
duk, to inform hir of a gret preparation of grayn and other
victell provyded in Louvayn and Champayny, for to be sent down
by the ryver of Maze to the Lowe Countreys, for the prince
<P 54>
of Parma's army, which mass of victell is to come by the dukes
castell of Sedan, under his bridg; and though he have good will
to stay it, yet he dar not so doo, for feare of offence to be
intended ageynst hym, but if he cold devise how to by it of the
owners, with collor to serve both for his own provisions to
store his own castells and houses, and to distribut amongst his
neighbours that do want, he sayth he wold aventur the staye with
that collor, and though the vallew may be, as it is thought,
above j=c= thousand crowns, yet his desyre is to borrow but
forty, or thirty, or, I thynk, twenty thousand crowns, towardes
that purpos. And herin hir majesty hath gret lykyng to have this
stayd, as a matter of very gret moment, as your lordship hath
gret cause so to thynk by the want of victells presently in
Flaunders and Br[\abant\] , but hir Majesty, fyndyng hir charges
otherwise so great, she doth not yeld to this loone, but hath
thought of some other meanes, as hereafter followeth.
   First, she wold have your lordship to impart this matter, as
you shall thynk mete, to the states ther, in secret sort, for
which purpos the gentillman Sevilly offreth to come to your
lordship, as he sayth he also ment to have doone, as sent from
the duk his master, and hir majesty thynketh this intention to
stay this provision of such a moment to weaken the adversaryes
forces, as, in very truth, a power of men ageynst them hyred
with j=c= thowsand crowns cold not so much annoy the
adversaryes, and, if the states might yeld to the loone of the
some of xxx thousand crowns to this purpooss, hir majesty wold
thynk very well of them, the consideration wherof hir majesty
hath willed me, in hir name, to be left to your lordship.
   And besyde this meane, as if it shold not take place, hir
majesty hath also commanded me to instruct our ambassador in
France to understand the duke of Bullions mynd, whyther he shall
not lyk that the French kyng be moved from hir majesty, very
ernestly, ether to impeach this great convoye, consideryng the
great derth of victells in France, or consideryng how hir
majesty
<P 55>
hath bene hertofore animated to enter into this action, to save
the Low Countreys from the conquest of the Spanyardes, and to
impeach the king of Spayns gretnes; and, therfor, to move hym,
in honor, to prohibitt the frequent convoy of victells out of
France, or els that he will not mislyk if the duke of Bullion
can stey this convoye. And in these two sortes, hir majesty hath
thought to devise meanes to stay this convoy, but whyther the
same will be stayd I do dout, and yet, truly, I know not how the
adversary might receave a greter blow, without drawyng of any
weapon.
   Wher your lordship hath had gret desyre to have had sir
William Pellham, and also my lord Graye, your lordship shall
understand that I have done my uttermost for Mr. Pellham, but
hir majestes offence appeareth such towardes hym as she wold in
no wise yeld ether to acquit hym of his dett, or to stall it as
he desyred, and so he, alledgyng his dishabillite to passe for
want of furnytur, though he confessed to me, and some others,
that he had receaved v=cl= of your lordship towardes his
furnytur, which he had layd out, and so was indetted to your
lordship; but his gretest impedyment was, that he did ow to
other persons about v=Ml= which he cold not pay, as he had a
desyre, by sellyng of some landes, but that no man wold by of
hym whylest he was in hir majesties dett; and in this sort his
stey remayned xv or xvj dayes, notwithstandyng that I never
cessed, I thynk, any iij whole dayes together, without movyng
and intreatyng of hir majesty to shew hym favor, in remittyng
part and stallyng the rest, but I cold not obteyn my request,
and yet she willed that he shuld be commanded to depart; whereto
he answered, that, as a privat soldier, he wold go, so
commanded, but to tak any chardg, he was so unhable, as he
offred hymself to be ether a prisoner or a banished man. In this
sorte the poore gentillman being afflicted, he fell sodaynly and
daungeriosely sick, whereof I informed hir majesty, and thereby
to have pitte of hym. Wheruppon hir majesty yelded only to have
his dett stalled, without remission of any part, addyng that he
shuld not go over to your lordship, but
<P 56>
that the lord Gray shuld come to yow, whose case I also reported
for his dett to hir majesty, but therunto she hath yelded to
remytt hym a part, and to stall the some that he borrowed whan
he went into Ireland, which was ij=Ml=. Hereof I have even this
daye wrytten to Mr. secretary, to advertise my lord Graye.
   My lord, all this letter I have bene forced to wryte in my
bed, which I have kept these two dayes, not, as your lordship
hath knowen, for payne of my gout, but in dede havyng seven
dayes past rubbed of a good deale of skyn uppon my shyn, I did
neglect the healyng of it whan I shuld, and so am I now forced
to kepe my bed without any hose, or without any salve, hopyng
within two dayes more to have it whole; and, therefore, I pray
your lordship to accept my scriblyng in a rude sort in good
part, and, doutyng of passadg, I mynd to dooble this letter, and
to send it by some others. From the court at Grenwych, 12.
January, 1585.
   Your lordships most assured,
   W. Burghley.
   After I had wrytten this letter thus farr, I have hard of the
takyng of a hoye of Holland, wherin are taken ten or twelve
horses of my sons. God send better luck for his own passadg.
   My lord, we heare dayly that the Hollanders carry vyctells to
Calliss under pretence of cockettes to come to England. I assure
your lordship ther can be no more care taken than is to stey
carryadg out of England.
   W. Burghley.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 57>
[} [\LETTER XXII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO LORD BURGHLEY. 14TH
JANUARY, 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretarie, I know yow think long to hear of some certein
proceeding here, which, for my parte, I doe as greatly hasten,
assuring yow, that, since I came to the Hage, I have not ceassed
calling upon the states for their resolution, which they will in
no wise make other then that I must be absolute governour, both
of warre and peace, over all their provinces.
   As upon new yeers day in the morning they came all to me, and
brought with them a heralt and trumpettes, meaning as soone as
they had delyvered their speech, which D. Leoninus had to make
for them, which was to offer to me, with many good woordes for
her majesties sake, the absolute governement of the whole
provinces, and to proclaime the same immediatly. I was skarce
readie, when one brought me woord of their being all in my great
chamber, desyring to speake with me. Not knowing or thinking it
had ben for any such matter, I made haste to goe to them, and so
did, having the best of my company there with me. As soone as I
came to them, by and by Leoninus began an oration to me, and,
even as he began, one told me in mine eare, that they were
<P 58>
come to offer this matter, and had brought heralt and all, &c. I
was so bold presently to interrupt the chauncelour, telling him,
that I heard he had some matter rather to deale more privately
in, than so openly, and therfore prayed him and the rest, to
come in with me to my chamber, where they should have a more
convenient place. He turned abowt and said, "Yow hear my lord
desyers us to withdraw with him into his chamber," and so they
all went with me into my bedchamber, and I called such of the
best of my companie as I thought meetest for v or vj, wherof Mr.
Davison and Mr. Dr. Clerk were ij.
   And there the chauncelour began again, and proceeded with his
matter, which was, indeed, after a long discourse of her
majesties goodnes, of the love of the country to her, of the
trust they had in her above all the world, of the necessity they
had for safetie of their state and countreys, albeit her
majestie would not take the soveraigntie upon her, which they
yet desyred might be, to choose some person of honour and
creditt to be their governour. And as there was no prince in the
world whom they ought obedience and duety unto, but to her
majestie, so seing the creditt and trust it pleased her to putt
me in here alredie, and the favour, creditt, and I cannot tell
what, so many good woordes they used of me, they tooke knowledge
of that I had long had at her majesties handes, with manie yeers
contynuaunce in her service, as appeered, they said, both now by
her own commendation by lettres, as also to their commissioners
in England, that had reported the same of her own mouthe: they
did not know any person whom they could desyre so much to take
this office in hand as my self, and, therfore, with one whole
consent they did there beseech me, even for the love her
majestie bare them, and for the help of so afflicted a countrey,
that was ever a faithfull frend to the crowne of England, that I
would take the place and name of absolute governour, and
generall of all their forces and souldiers, with their whole
revenues, taxes, composicions, and all manner of benefittes that
they have, or may have, to be putt freely and absolutely into my
<P 59>
handes, disposicion and order, with so ample woords and termes
as here were too long to recite, seing I will shortly send you
the whole by Mr. Davison.
   As soone as he had ended I aunswered by Mr. Davison, whom I
required to delyver it in French, as they all speak only French,
that, as this was a matter unlooked for, being further then had
past in the contract with her most excellent majestie
heretofore, so was I presently very farre unprovided to give
them aunswer to this matter, albeit, in her majesties behaulf,
greatly to thank them for their ernest goodwills and great
affeccion borne to her majestie; and very true it was they did
all acknowledge, that her highnes had shewed herself a most
loving princesse and neighbour to them, as did well appeer to
their embassadors in England, that what she did was only for the
good will she bare to this afflicted countrey, and for no
private respect or commoditie to her self. I did also give them
most hartie thankes for myself, that did conceive so well of me,
being but a straunger to them, that they would hazard so great a
matter upon me, as all their state, both well and ill dooing,
should depend therupon. But as her majesties gracious favour
towardes me ledd them to this conceite of my abilitie, farre
more then was in me to deale in any such cause, so I prayed them
not to take it in ill parte, that I desyred at their handes, to
proceed with them in thoes cawses which I had to doe in her
majesties behaulf with them, and give me time, or els some of
them to come unto me, to hear what I had to delyver unto them
touching the contract alredy past betwixt her majestie and them,
wherin I thought they should finde I had more alredy layed upon
me, than so weake shoulders were able to bear, and well to goe
thorow withall. That her majestie had sent me only to serve
them, and so I promised I would, both faithfully and honestly,
even as her majestie had commaunded and willed me to doe. So
they returned, after Mr. Davison had made this aunswer for me,
not leaving, at their departure, to insist upon their former
request very ernestly.
   The next morning they appointed v or vj to come to me, which
<P 60>
were of the chief of them, and, leaving the former matter, as
not to speak of it at all, I delt with them upon certain pointes
and questions, such as her majestie had willed me principally to
remember; as, first, to know what their forces were, who were
their chief governours, and had charge of townes and fortes,
what meanes they had to contynue and mainteyne their forces, how
their people and garrisons were paied, what debtes they were in
to their souldiers. Theis, and sundry other, which are sett
downe for her majestie, ye shall receive: leying before them
what a mighty enemy they had against them, it behooved them to
shew good force and good means to withstand such an enemy. To
theis thinges, and all other questions, I think their wilbe good
satisfaction given to her majestie, to cawse her think their
state not so hard as hath ben doubted, nor for her majestie to
repent her cost or charge adventured for them. I doe assure
myself it will proove the best expences that ever shee bestowed
in her life, and the best repayed againe to her coffers, if God
overthrow not the world.
   I did never see greater probability in my life of assured
good successe, and protest unto you, I like the matter xx tymes
better then I did in England, and so I beleeve any man here of
judgement doth the like. And yet is it nowe at the verie woorst,
as well for the decaie of our men, as for the season of this
time, which is such as we cannot, till the wether break, send by
water or land almost to any place. I could not hear owt of
Zeland but by long seas, all the ryvers be ycie and frozen, but
not to bear any horse or cariage.
   Th'enemy hath attempted sundry places, but repulsed at all,
and I dare presume thus much for her majesties name only, that
if her comfort had not come, yow had heard of many a revolt er
this daie, and the poor garrison-men, the straungers chiefly,
suffer presently the greatest miserie in the world for all
thinges, and yet send good comfort daily hither to me, that for
the queen of Englandes sake they will suffer more yet. The queen
of England
<P 61>
they would serve as their mistris, and under me as her minister
here, with a better will then ever they served under the prince
of Orange; yet they loved him well, but they never hoped of the
libertie of this countrey till now.
   It is assured me the states are verie well able to perfourme
their charge, and with great ease. The count Hollock [\is\]
surely a wise, gallant gentleman, and a right souldier, and
verie well esteemed with many of the capteins and souldiers; he
hath only one fault, which is, drinking, but good hope that he
will amend it. Some make me believe I shalbe able to doe much
with him, and I meane to doe my best, for I see no man that
knowes all theis countreys, and the people of all sortes, like
him, and this fault overthrowes all. Here is another little
fellow, as litle as may be, but one of the gravest and wisest
young men that ever I spake withall; it is the count Guilialme
of Nassau, he governes Frizeland; I would every province had
such another. He had noe lettre from her majestie yet, nor his
father, but that makes not so great matter as for this young
gentleman. Her majestie may doe well also to contynue some
kindenes from time to tyme with this howse of Nassau, especially
to shew to take care for the count Maurice, who hath ben greatly
laboured to have harkened to a composition, I can tell you, and
I see him much discontented with the states for certein. He hath
a sullen, deep witt, and shrewd counsellours of his fathers
abowt him, now that they see the hope of Holland and Zeland
taken awaie, which was the marke was wholy by the father shotte
at, and almost hitt, as I am sure you have heard. The young
gentleman is yet to be wonne only to her majestie, I perceive,
of his owne inclination. The howse is merveilous poor, and litle
regarded
<P 62>
by the states hitherto, and if they gett any thing it is like to
be by her majestie, which I wishe should be altogether, and she
maie easily doe for him to wynne him sure; I will undertake it.
   Well, now I will returne a litle backe again, to tell you
what followed since my former conference with the states. They
went to their fellowes and told them what had passed; they
aunswered me again, and brought me an act sett downe in writing
by them all, that I should be pryvie to all their state, as well
for their forces as their means, and that I should see very
flatly that they abused not her majestie, neither with the offer
of sovereigntie, nor yet with the state of their abilitie to
mainteine their cawse, but better then ever they told her of,
and referred to me what I thought of the strength and force of
theis countreys. "Well, now we will say, and make your lordship
know," say they, "the people bearing the love wee see they doe
to her majestie, if she had taken the sovereignty over us, she
should have had monethly 300,000 florens, certeinly payed to her
purse, which is 30,000=li= sterling, every moneth, beside the
customes of merchauntes, and Flaunders if it might be recovered,
which did yeeld as much and more alone; and her majestie should
doe more good, and defend th'enemy farr easilyer, with 100,000
than we shall with 200,000, for the obedience and reverence to
her majestie would be as great as in England, and that we doe is
even with feare and force among them, which bringeth such
confusion as there is no remedie, but either your lordship must
take the whole governement upon you, at our humble suite, and at
the request of all the rest, or els all wilbe yet lost;"
confessing that confusion of officers hath undoon their
governement, and not to be recovered but by som one to take it
that is so backt as I should be by the countenaunce of her
majestie, whom the people only trust and love, for unto no other
will they committ that which they will to her majestie, or one
of hirs; and so doe they flatly conclude the matter upon me.
   All the lords here have ben in like sort with me, and all the
captens, and governors, and magistrates of townes, pressing me
<P 63>
most earnestly, if I love her majestie, if I love the good of
England, and theis countryes, to take it, and that forthwith,
bycawse the souldiers be unpayed, and no man will contribute any
longer but to her majesties minister, and to him all places doe
promis, and have sent their procuratours, as they told me
alredy, to bind themselves and all their townes for the payment
of ij=c= m. florens monethly, beside the admiraltie to be
discharged by their customes, as it is alredy. They will also
make their oath to me, and all officers, to returne presently to
paie all sommes to me. Thus it standeth presently, as either all
must be hazarded and lost, or els I must take it, which, as
farre as I can see, and all here with me, as the case enforceth
it, must needes be best for her majesties service everie waie.
   The reasons Mr. Davison shall delyver you, who hath seen how
I have proceeded, and upon what necessitie either this waie must
be taken, or els all overthrowne. It is doon for the best, and
if so her majestie accept of it, all wilbe to the best. I have
had none other scope herein, nor shall have, but her majesties
service above all worldly respectes, and well knowne to the
wisest here with me, how desperatly both the lords and capteins
were and are bent, if I should not take this upon me, to have
left and given over the whole service of theis states, which had
made an easie conquest for th'enemie, but a most dangerous for
her majestie. Thus referring the full declaration of our doinges
here to Mr. Davison, who shall shortly be with you, doe take my
leave, and commytt you to the Lords protectyon. At Leyden, this
xiiij. of January.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 64>
[} [\LETTER XXIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 15TH JANUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretary, as you shall shortly hear of our hole
procedinges by Mr. Davyson, so must I entreat you most ernestly,
even as the well doing of my poore servyce here may be tendred,
but spetyally for the honor and servyce of hir majestie, that
you wyll be meanes that ther may be a good quantytye of money
sent over, as ther ys behind of the hole some her majestie dyd
sett done, as I take yt, above lxx=m=li. So you wyll procure, as
much as in [\you\] may lye, that the most parte may be sent
over. Hit shalbe the worst, and the most, she shalbe charged
with, but, at the beginning, xx=m=li. shall stand in more stead
than xl=m=li. iiij monthys hence, and I am well perswaded, as
you shall se at Mr. Davysons coming, that they here have good
meanes to maynteyn ther warrs, and when we make reconing at home
of a defencyble warr, hit must be so defencyble, as we must be
able to have always vj or vij=m= men, horse and footemen, to
frunt the enymye, who, all this hard wether, hath gon from place
to place with iiij=m= footemen and xv=c= horse, and at this day
he kepes the fyld, and hath putt in danger iij or iiij townes of
great importance, as Brabee, Wenloe, Vianna, and Bomeley, as
also now he ys come uppon Zeland syde, and wyll doe what he can
to Lylle and Lyskinshook, whear ther hath byn much decay of
soldyers, but ther ys doing all that ys possible for defence,
for otherwyse we ar no way able to resist them, which they know,
<P 65>
and doth make them presume the more at this tyme. But the states
have agreed, and doe find ther ys no remedy, but we must erect a
camp to brydell this lyberty of the enymye, or ells he wyll kepe
a warr this xx yere, and make us all wery, and, this way being
taken, I warrant ye we wyll shortly wery him as well, and yet
never hazard any battell, which he wyll be as loth to come to as
we.
   I am in hope of an enterpryse to tak place shortly which ye
wylbe gladd to hear of. God send yt to fall out as I looke for,
and that ye may provyde us spedyly with a good some of money,
being all one to hir majestye, and I wyll undertake she shall
com to no furder chardge whatsoever. I wyll help to ease hir,
before the end, of a good parte of this, yf she doe but contynew
hir favour and good countenaunce to this cause only, as I trust
she wyll, or elles she knoweth not the lacke she wyll fynd of
the frendshipp of these countreys. As, uppon my honour and truth
to you, they were almost utterly gonn yf I had not aryved when I
dyd.
   Thus, referring ye for the rest to Mr. Davyson at his coming,
I wyll take my leave, protestyng my hole care and endeavour his
to doe hir majestie acceptable servyce, or elles God not to lett
me lyve, yf otherwyse yt shuld be. In much hast this xv. of
Januery,
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my very honorable good frend sir Francis
Walsingham knight, principall secretarye to her majesty.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 66>
[} [\XXIV. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 17TH JANUARY,
1585-6.\] }]
   My very good lord, as matters do rise so I am bold to wryte
unto yow, and yet I se so many misaventures in savety of
arryvall of lettres, as I se it necessary to repete thynges in
second lettres, wherewith your lordship may be troobled by
readyng, but I had rather, so woole your lordship, than leave it
undoone.
   In my former lettres I have shewed yow that hir majesty wold
have your lordship to cause inquisition to be made of the nombre
and power of the shippes of warr in Holland and Zelland, and
with what nombre they wold be content, uppon ther charges, to
serve this yere with hir majesties navy agaynst the king of
Spaynes power, which hath bene reported greater than I can
beleev, but hir majesty is resolved to have hir navy redy at
Portesmouth before the end of March. Hir majesty, also, wold
gladly have your lordship discover to what purpooss the Itallien
carpyntors do work, as it is sayd, very secretly in chirches, in
Antwerp, about shippes or gallyes.
   Of late Ortell, that remayneth here agent for the states,
propounded certain questions uppon the trade to be used by the
shippars of Holland and Zelland; the articles I do send herewith
to your lordship, with an answer by us here gyven, under your
lordships advise, uppon conference with the states. We fynd
here, that, under collor of any trade with merchants to any part
of Pycardy, the enemy is succored. Nevertheless, as your
lordship
<P 67>
shall ther fynd the states conformable, we here will prescribe
that same order to be kept. Truly, my lord, it is most necessary
that all kind of victells, or matters for shippyng, be utterly
forbydden.
   We have advertisementes from Lyshborn by sondry come from
thence, that all English men ar at liberty ther, and that the
preparation is as yett not grett, only all manner of great
hulkes ar stayd. And so I end from any farther trooblyng of your
lordship. 17. January, at Grenwych.
   Your lordships most assuredly,
   W. Burghley.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To the right honorable my very good lord, the
erle of Lecester, lieutenant generall for all hir majesties
forces in the Low Contreys.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 67>
[} [\LETTER XXV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 22ND JANUARY, 1585-6.\] }]
<P 68>
   Mr. secretary, I can wryte nothing to ye touching the state
of the tresure or tresorer. I wyll not blame him yet, nor excuse
him, but I dowbt he hath a conning under-tresorer. This vj wekes
can I gett no reckoning, nor the awdytor any bookes from them,
tyl this last weke. Our money goeth very low, and I beleive ye
will not be best pleased with the former expences, and yet am I
forst to dysburs much of this money for relyfe of the souldyers
not payd, and, as I wrote of late to you, so doe I now also to
my lord tresorer by Mr. Davyson, to besech ye both, yf ye wyll
have any hope of good of our servyce here, to gett us a good
pece, or rather the hole somme, of that ys behind of hir
majestys allowance. Yf hit be not well ordered and husbanded,
lett the blame light hevyly uppon me.
   My thinkes I hear your answere alredy, that no man knoweth
better than I the dyffycultye to gett money from hir majesty,
and so I must satysfye myself. But, as I confes yt ys hard to
procure great sommes from hir majesty, so must I lett you know,
and more now than whan I was partaker of those dyffycultyes ther
with you, that yf hir majesty doe not deall now gratyously and
princely with these people, and consider how infynyttly hit doth
import her highness to bring these causes to a good end, whan yt
ys in such forwardnes as they be, and that yt ys only the
expence of a lytle money, and no more than she hath alreddy
contractyd and agreed with them for, and for which she hath such
a pawen as she may assure hirself, by them alone, to have all
hir charges ageyn, yf the worst fall owt that can be. And here I
say to ye Mr. secretary, and I speak yt in the presence of God,
I am veryly perswaded, yf hir majesty had not donn this she hath
donn, these hole countreys had byn gonn by this day; and, se the
good providence of God! yf I had not come when I dyd, the wynd
<P 69>
turned the next daye, and hath so contyneued ever synce, that,
this being the xlij day since my aryvall, I never hard word from
Englonde; I trust, therfore, whan yt comes yt shalbe good. But,
if I had steyd tyll this day, all hope had byn gone of hir
majesty, and all the practyces of the enymye had byn sett
afoote, for I founde them very well onward at my aryvall; yet, I
testyfye a truth, as sone as hir majestys favour hether was sene
and known, I thinke from the beginning of these trowbles the
people were never hotter ageinst the enemye than at this day,
nor better devotyd to hir; in so much as she may now dyspose of
all, and dyrect all, that otherwyse had lost all, both countryes
and credytt, yea, with a mortall hate for ever to our natyon;
and yf the case be thus for hir majesty, for Gods sake lett hir
comfort all here, and lett hir be sure the enymye was never so
dowbtfull, nor so perplexed, as he ys at this day; for he stoode
in great hope, before my coming, to have had certen places
delyvered unto him of great importance, and I think hit was so
promysed to him in dede, but as sone as the souldyers hard of
hir majesty taking the cause in hand, and that I was com, they
setled themselves wholy this way, and so doe contyneue, and have
resisted the enymyes attemptes most faythfully; yet have they
not byn payd a long while, nether wold have trusted the states
but for hir majesty, takyng my word only that they shalbe payd;
and so they shalbe forthwith, I have wroght so for them. Nether
wold they wyllingly trust the states touching hir majesty, but
that I must have the absolute government, and the recept of
their reveneues, or elles they wold not be pacyfyed, nor trust
to their paymentes more; which suerly hath byn yll handled, for
they have meanes and meanes ageyn to meyntayn all these charges,
but their careless imploying of yt hath hindred all; but this
requyres a hole wekes informacion of Mr. Davison, who hath donn
hir majesty notable servyce here, and doe pray ye, and as ever
ye tender the success of this servyce, retorn him hither, with
the more credytt the better, for without him I confes myself
quyte maymed. His
<P 70>
credytt ys mervelous great here that ever I sawe of any stranger
in any countrey, in my lyfe, and he lyves lyke a gentleman and
chargeably every way. And my nephew Sydney, I assure ye, ys
notably estemed, and I think within a few months shalbe able to
doe hir majesty here other manner of servyce than may well be
looked for.
   The prince of Parma, uppon my aryvall, and hearing of the
dysposicion of these countreys wholy bent to shew their good
trust of hir majesty, by comytting all chardge and confydence to
me, being hir servaunt and subiect, he assembled the counsell,
the presydent &c. ther opened the matter, shewing the great
dyffycultyes happened unto them unlooked for, for yt was a
matter assured them that the queen of England wold never attempt
any thing, ether here or elleswhere, but he saw now yt was
otherwyse, and that she had sent Drake to the Indyes, and the
erll of Leycester into the Lowe Countreys, alleaging all he
could do. The president answered him: "Now sir," quod he, "ye
may se what yt was for the king our master to forsake the
councell was geven him, and the offer the people made of these
countreys to have had a peace, and whether yt had byn better to
[\have\] accepted that, or elles to consume his treasure and
people in vayn; for yt was never other lyke whan all such meanes
as the queen of England made accompt of was taken away, as the
prince of Orange that was at hir devotyon, and Monsieur who was
in stryct league with hir, but she wold rather defend and kepe
these countreys hir frendes, then suffer our master to enioye
them, being afreyd of his greatnes to be so nere hir as these
countreys shuld be, except there were better love betwene them
than ther ys. But refusing that peace his people offred him to
have had religyon fre, was the cause of all these warrs, and
losse now of thes countreys, which than he had byn sure of, yea,
and, after a while, to be sure also to have putt down the
herytykes and protestantes, as he might have used the matter;
but now," saythe [\he\] , "yt ys to late for councell, the queen
of Englond ys not so easy to be removyd, being received as she
ys
<P 71>
among them, nether doe I ever looke now for so good an end
ageyn."
   Synce that, ther cam within these ij daies one from Antwerp,
beside here ar sondry letters from thence of yt, (which ys donn
of purpose to bring this people in dowbt of hir majestys dealing
for them,) that there was a howse in Antwerp, the Englysh howse,
preparing for me; that she made but a shew of warr, her
intentyon ys only to make a peace, and that I had instructyons
to prepare the myndes of the states to conformetye, and to be
reconcyled to the king. I assure ye a pestylent practyce yt ys,
and no one thing under heaven so lykely to cutt my throte, but
yt doth agre well with a tale that was wrytten also from
Bruxelles to the cont de Hollock here. That the prince of Parma,
hearing of my aryvall, chaft very much, and semed greatly to be
deceaved that hir majesty wold send as she hath donn, "but,"
sayth he, "ther ys no remedye but one; we must gyve out brutes
that the queen of England hath offerd talk of peace, which wyll
brede presently jelosye in the states heads, and some devyces we
must have to make devyssion among them, to breake this
resolucyon to lett the government be at the queen of Englands
dyspocytion." This letter cam to him, which he shewyd me, above
iij wekes agoe, and, as the cont sayd, from a very credyble
place; so that he presumeth styll of the umore of Englond. But
God defend hir majesty shuld loose the honor, credytt, and
saftye, she ys in so good way to obteyn, and lett me have
shamfull death and utter reproch, yf hir majesty goe princely
and couragiously forward, yf ever she receive the lyke porcyon
of all these as she shall doe by this actyon here. And I assure
you yf ye saw these places, with the dysposicion of the people,
as I doe, ye wold think, even for hir majestys own safty sake,
but for her own tyme only, beside the respect of Englond, that
more money than yet she hath leyd out to be most happely spent
yf ther were no gage or hope to have yt payd ageyn.
<P 72>
Lett me retorn, therfore, once ageyn, to pray ye, and entreat
ye, to stand ernestly for the spedye sending away of money; and
to send yt by dryblettes causeth yt to be consumed to lytle
purpose, and no honour or credytt, nor yet relyfe in dede of the
soldyer. Touching this I have wrytten in a scedule enclosed,
which I pray ye break after ye have redd yt.
   And touching the opinion of a defensyve warr, I know ye wyll
now chang yt, for ther ys no wey to overthrow this state but
that. Experience doth teach yt, for the enymye goeth where he
wyll, he makyth skours now in every place; as, ferst, in
Flanders, about Ostend and Sluce, he hath made so many, as no
man can sturr out to anoye the enymye any way, nether can they
be taken with all the garasons ther. He hath byn synce about
Grave, a place of great importanee for us, not farr from Bolduke
in Brabant; he hath attemptyd yt iiij or v tymes this frost, but
myshing of yt, he hath buylt iij or iiij forts about yt, that no
vyttell can com to yt. He hath donn the lyke at Venlou, and ys
presently in doing ther, and hath ther iij=m= men and a 1000
hors; all the garasons we have ther ys not able to deale with
him. So from this place he wyll to some other, but yf he follow
these ij so strongly as he may doe, I se no way we ar able to
mach him yet in the fild to relyve them, and, lett him alone, he
wyll surely have them. Therfore ther ys no remedye for us but to
make a camp, which wylbe, with those we have alredy, without any
great chardg donn, whereby we may be masters of the fild, for he
dares not draw his garasons fourth of his great towens, so shall
we relyve the places thus beseged, and recover the skonces and
fortes he hath buylt to anoye us. Besides he doth spoyll all
countreys that ar most frutefull and help us most, by his
contynewall incursions which is a great matter I se here, to
loose the servyce of the bours, and yt ys also a dyscouraging
warr to this people that ar dayly charged with taxes and
contrybucions, to se an endles warr,
<P 73>
as they caule yt when yt ys altogether defensyve, and so yt ys
in dede; and we ar sure the enymy ys more ferfull to adventure
than we ar, for yf we loose, we have styll strong townes able to
defend, yf he loose, he hath no townes to hold him, for all he
hath ys alredy by the force of his garasons.
   I have sent to ye, sir, also, for leave that sondry gentlemen
may have leave to take upp som men in Englond, without any peny
charge ether to hir majesty or the countrey, and our enymyes ar
the bolder for that they know the decaye of our soldyers. I wold
be gladde, also, to have leave for v=c= of my none servantes
more, not in Wales alone, but of my other tenantes, where I
shall think mete; for I tooke but iiii=c= of the v=c= hir
majesty dyd graunt, and I wyll not gyve those iiii=c= for the
best v=c= & l. that I se or can hear of here, nether shall ther
any man have charge, by my good wyll, but such as shall have
good cause to care for his men. I think xv=c= wyll skant well
furnyshe all the bandes decayd here, and I wold ernestly desier
ij=m= more, such as wyll wyllingly com. Ye have people to many,
and ye nede not fear any attempt to Englond in assaling yt by
force, as long as hir majesty hath these countreys, I warant ye;
therfore help us yf ye wyll styll be quyett. And yf I may be
able to wander a while with ij=m= horse, and 4 or 5000 footemen,
about Easter ye shall hear, without any meting withall, all
those skonces shalbe caught, our own places putt in good sewrty,
and the enymye as well spoyled. And I pray ye, for these things,
beleave us pore men that serve, and have best cause to know what
course in reason ys best.
   When Mr. Davyson comes he shall tell ye at lardge of some
partyculer thinges ye wold have lytle beleved, but I know them
to be most true. That Vyliers ys a most vyle trayterous knave,
and doth abuse a young nobleman here extremely, the conte Morys;
for all his religion he ys a more ernest perswader secretly to
have him yeld to a reconcylliacion than St. Allagonde was, and
hath an instrument about the young gentleman, one that pleasyth
his affectyons, that ys a very dangerous man. The young man
<P 74>
hath a solem, slye wytt; but, in troth, yf any be to be dowbtyd
toward the king of Spain, yt ys he and his counsellers, for they
have byn altogether so farr French, and so farr in myslyke with
Englond, as they cannot almost hide yt, and this umore ys styll
kindled by this prest, and some say yet St. Allegonde, but I doe
not beleve yt, for that he hath geven his word for yt to me. The
other shall not tarry ten dayes nether in Holland nor Zeland; he
ys greatly hated here of all sortes. And yt shall goe hard but I
wyll wynn the young conte, and gett the knave about him removed,
whose name ys Mallorey, one the prince himself dowbtyd of before
his deth.
   Old Medykyrk was farr gonn ageinst hir majesty, and our
natyon also, and so farr dowbtyd, as now, at the nomynacion of
councellors, I named him for one, thinking he had good credytt
among the states, and I found them all ageinst him, and made
request to me to leave him out, which I mervelled at, and doe
plainly chardge him with his yll mynd to hir majesty. Paule
Buys, I lern, certenly was putt from his offyce in Holland only
for standing agenst the French, and preferring Englond alweys,
and indede he passeth them all for skyll and judgement.
   The cont Hollock deserveth great countenaunce at hir majestys
handes, for he ys a plaine gentleman, and one that always delt
flatly with the prince for the French, even tyll his death; and
was also so reddy and had best power to delyver both Flushing
and the Bryll into hir majestys handes, and yt ys most true that
he was greatly pressed to stand agenst yt, and the yong count
was not wyllyng to have yt rendred, only by Vyllyers meanes, and
the cont Hollock perceving told the cont Morrys, in a great
rage, that yf he tooke any other course than the queen of
Englond, and swear by no beggers he would drouen his prest in
the haven before his face, and turne himself and his
mother-in-law out of there howse there, and thereuppon went with
Mr. Davyson to the delyvery of yt. This man must be cheryshed;
he ys sound and faythfull, and hath indede all the chife holdes
in his handes, and at his comandment. Ye shall doe well to
procure him a letter of
<P 75>
thankes, taking knoledge in generall of his good wyll to hir
majesty. He ys a right Almayn in manner and fashion, fre of his
purse and of his drynk, yet doe I wysh him hir majestyes
pencyoner before any prince in Germany, for he loves hir, and
able to serve hir, and doth desyer to be knowen hir servant. He
hath byn sought and labored by his nerest kinsfolkes and best
frendes in Germany, to have left the states, and to have the
king of Spaines pencyon, and very great reward, but he wold not.
A cheyn of ij=c= li. wold be well bestowd uppon him in the meane
tyme; and uppon his further desart, which I think wylbe shortly,
I trust hir majesty wyll accept of his offer to be hir servaunt
during his lyfe, being in dede a very noble soldyer. He hath
some matters a-brewing which he hopeth well of; for my parte I
have an other, brought to me by Mr. Davyson, which yf yt fall
out as I verylye looke for yt, that wylbe worth 'God a mercye!'
and nerer home, and of exceding great consequence for hir
majesty and this cause, and or xx days ye shall hear of yt, I
trust in God.
   Ther ys another matter and I must trowble you withall, and
full fayn I wold have yt redressed; hit ys my lord North. Hir
majesty hath comaunded him hether in my company; he doth
certenly doe me all the honor he can devyse, and he hath not the
best boddy for such a place, spetyally he having no chardge, nor
any allowance in the world, and surely his expences cannott be
lytle, albeyt his grefe must be more to have no countenance at
all but his own estate, and a man of his yeres and long servyce.
He doth take yt hir majesty doth place him for some respect of
myne, which wyll gender an inward grudge to me at length. I am
not the cause of yt. He ys a wyse gentleman, and for any nede I
se I shall have of Mr. Bartholomew Clerk, I assure ye I had farr
rather have my lord Northes councell and assistance; and for
lawe here ys one, the other lytle Clerk, who ys much beyond
Bartholomew
<P 76>
in all lerninges of lawe, as hath well appered here alredy. Yf
at Mr. Davysons coming ye can, ether with honour and allowance
kepe my lord here, or elles in some good sort by hir majesty
cauled for home, rather than to attend here without any charge
or countenaunce, I wold gladly wysh yt. That in the mean tyme yt
wyll lyke ye to wryte to my lord how carefull and myndfull I
have byn of him, shall doe me a great pleassur. And thus having
bin long, as I cannott others chuse having so much to imparte to
you, I wyll byd ye farewell, longing styll to hear from ye. At
the Hage, this xxij. of January.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   Bycause I se how the wynd kepes back all hearing from ye,
being xlij days synce I hard from England, sir, Grant Herns hath
a man that doth bring dayly fishe from this cost, and when no
shipp goeth out he wyll shift ageinst the wynd, and he comes
very safely. I pray ye bear with the faultes of my letter, hit
ys so long I cannott peruse yt.
   I am afrayd ye will compare me shortly to Wylliam Herll.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To Mr. secretary Walsingham.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 76>
[} [\LETTER XXVI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 31ST JANUARY 1585-6.\] }]
<P 77>
   Mr. secretary, Mr. Davyson doth now retorn home, which I
coulde hardly have yelded unto but only to have hir majesty
fully answered and satysfyed touching all our proceedinges here
synce my aryvall, and noe man able to doe yt but himself, praing
ye, good Mr. secretary, yf hir majesty wyll shew me any favour,
that thys may be one, to have Mr. Davyson retorn ageyn to me,
who I assure you ys the most sufficient man to serve hir majesty
that I know of all our nation; for he knoweth all partes of
these countreyes, and all persones of any accompt, with all ther
umores, and hath great credytt among them all here. And the
better servyce shall he be able to doe yf yt may please hir
majesty to gyve him such countenaunce as may encrease his
credytt here, for here hath byn many brutes and reportes of hir
good intentyon toward him, and he wyll deserve any goodnes she
shall bestow uppon him, whatsoever yt be.
<P 78>
   As for sir Wylliam Pellam, I look not for him; I se his
delayes be such. When I departyd thence he promysed me
faythfully that he wold follow me, what end soever he had, and
theruppon he had v=c=li. prest, but I se his joynders and
reioynders doth seke all delay, and spetyally that I saw in his
letter to hir majesty of late wrytten, wherein he asketh ageyn a
new suply of hir majesty, to sett him furth; a matter I know, of
old, what yt wyll doe. Therfore, sir, yf you find this
diffyculty styll, lett me no longer expect his uncerteinty. My
lord Grey for many respectes I wold be gladd of, but I can as
lytle hope of him, and except I might have one of them by the
end of this month, I shall after not much nede any of them, and
therfore I thought good to signyfye thus much unto ye; and the
only cause I wysh for my lord Grey, yf God call me, ther might
be such a one reddy here to command as he ys: but lett me know,
I beseche ye, with spede, what to trust unto.
   Now, sir, to my old sute, and more than tyme that yt were
grantyd, or rather here, which ys, for money; for I told ye,
before my coming, ther was no more payd than wold serve the end
of this month of February next, and you all there made a stryckt
reckoning how farr all your money wold strech, not accompting
the horsmen, nor sondry other charges leid out by all your
warrants to the tresorer before yt cam over, and yf we had the
full of that was delyvered for the armye, without these
paymentes, yet had yt payd no further than the end of February.
And I pray ye remember what I wrote touching the tresorer and
his deputye; I doe send over the audytor to you, who I take to
be an honest man, he wyll tell ye as much as I wrote, for I had
yt of him. But yf yt wyll please hir majesty to send over the
hole some behind for the yere, yf I make yt not strech as farr
as possibly yt may, and to serve the torn for this yere, lett yt
lye uppon me and all that I have to answer yt. But yt shalbe
otherwyse
<P 79>
handled than this was. Ther ys to to much pryvatt gayn soght,
more than ever I wold have beleavyd, and all leyd uppon hir
majesty, for hir proffytt, they say.
   Touching any procedinges here for the matters of this state,
I leave to Mr. Davyson to declare to you. I trust very shortly
to send ye some good nues of some enterprise uppon our enymyes,
who of late, in the frost, went into Freseland, and ther
overthrew iij or iiij=c= of conte Wylliams soldyers, and tooke
sondry boores prisoners. Synce that, Schenk hath mett twyce with
them; at the first, he overthrew a cornett of Italians, and
tooke xl horse and men prisoners; the second tyme, being this
last weke, he overthrew v=c= of the bravest soldyers they had,
and kyld iij=c= in the place, and took a captain and xv
prisoners. I doe not hear of any man that dealeth so lustyly
with the enymye as he doth. I wyll cherysh him accordingly, and
wyll shortly be at Utryck and vyssett those places. Albeyt I
hope ye shall here some nues from me ye look not for or I com
thether.
   I assure ye Wylford ys to busye in advertysinge of that place
at Ostend; hit ys in good case, and yet have I taken order for
to better yt: he ys not to have credytt to all hys wrytinges.
The soldyers ther of late have taken uppon the river vj boates,
loden with corn and other vyttelles coming from Dunkirk and
Calles.
   My lord thesorer wrote to me to know, what nombre of shipps
and maryners here be to be had, yf nede werr. I have wrytten to
my lord, here be many more than hir majesty shall nede to beat
<P 80>
the king of Spain and all his frendes. Uppon small warning ye
shall not want inough to serve hir majesty, I warrant ye. I pray
ye make more of the merchantes of these countrey people ther;
they begyn a lytle to complayn of some hard dealing, but I have
satysfied these for this tyme. Ye wyll find these people are
worthe the cheryshing. So farewell, good Mr. secretary, in much
hast, this last of Januery.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   I will have care to do for captain Veall, your servant.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honourable good frende sir Fraunces
Walsingham knight, principall secretarye to the queenes
majestie.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 80>
[} [\LETTER XXVII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. DAVISON.
FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
Remembrances for Mr. Davison.
   First, how all the states here in every place, from my first
aryvall, receaved me as well for there generall and governour as
for hir majesties, pressing me very ernestly at my coming to the
Hage, to take uppon me the same absolute goverment of all these
provinces unyted; nevertheless I deferred yt by as many meanes
as I could, tyll I was fully informyd by the knoledge and meanes
which Mr. Davison had gotten of ther estate and abyllytye,
<P 81>
whereby beinge fully satysfied, hit was thought best service for
hir majestye any way to accept ther ernest offer.
   The causes which moved me to accept this place werr these. By
hir majesties apointement, I was hir generall of all hir forces
in these countreys, and by a contract, lykewyse generall of
their armye, and ther first counsellor. The confusion that was
amonge the states-generall bredd many dysorders almost uncurable
amonge them, as the discontentation of the captens, governors
and soldyers, in all places becom desperatt for lack of pay, the
yll imploying of ther treasure, whereby all matters most
necessary for the warrs and defence of the countrey was utterly
neglectyd, the unyversall hate and myslyke which both these and
all the people had conceaved ageinst them, being such as, yf hir
majesty had not sent when she dyd, ether they must have chosen
some one governor, to have taken this charge in hande to remedy
there confusions, or elles have reconcyled themselves to the
enyme, for avoyding the further ruyn and hazard of themselves.
And yf they had had any other governor then myself, hit ys most
certen hir majesty could not have these countreys so fully at
her commandment as now she ys lyke to have. Nether might she
convenyently have kept, ether an armye, or any nobleman here, to
be hir generall, but must have byn at the directyon and
dysposytion of that governor. Besides, how the contractes and
agrementes could be so well kept, ether for paymentes or
otherwyse, that ys betwene hir majesty and these countreys, ys
as dowbtful, or rather owt of dowbt. Beside yt had byn by that
meanes also very dangerous that a peace might have byn procured
and concluded with the enymye without hir majesties consent or
prevety, hir people and captens, and towns delyvered for hir
seurty, in great danger to be all lost. The enymye offeryng any
revenge to any hir majesties domynions she might be depryved
also of such helps and succors as these countreys may well asist
hir now withall, the governor being at hir majestie comandment,
with all other services lykewyse, But, the governor being at hir
majesties dysposytyon
<P 82>
and dyrectyon, these wantes aforeseyd ar provyded for and
suplyed; hir people ar to be in all sewrty and to be well
treatyd; hir contractes and agrementes ar always to be well
observyd and kept to hir majesties most advantage. He also,
having the placyng and disposing of these garysons, the
paymentes and other condycyons toward hir majesty ar most lyke
to be better kept. No treaty or peace to be made or delt in but
by hir majesty. No attempt can be made by the enymye ageinst hir
majesties domynyons, but she may dyspose and have all such
succors as shalbe nedefull for hir. The last, and chefe, ys,
that hir majesty having hir one servant, whome she may comaunde,
to be ther governor and comaunder, she ys sure to comande them
as absolutly as he hath his authorytye from them to comand other
under his charge. So for this first parte, these ar reasons that
perswaded the acceptance of this goverment, seing of necessyty
this state dyd require one, and hir majesty having so nerely
placed me therein before, and being so farr interressed in these
countreys as she ys alredy.
   For the secound, which was the reconcylliacion to the enymye,
hit nedeth no argument; he ys sensles that conceaveth not that
yf the king of Spain had these countreys at his comandment, lett
hir majesty have the best peace that ever was or can be made,
and wee shall find, as the world now standeth, that he wyll
force the queen of England and Englond to be at his dysposytion.
What with Spain for the west and what with these countreys for
the est, England shall traffyqe no furder any of these ways than
he shall gyve leave, without every voyage shall aske the charge
of a whole navye to pass withall.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 83>
[} [\LETTER XXVIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM 1ST FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretorye, amongest my manye letters unto you of other
matters, I have forgotten one. I would gladly have Daniell
Rogers here, for some good services which I thincke he is fitt
for. Yf you fynde that her majestie meane to continue me in
service here, I hartely pray you that Daniell Rogers may be sent
to me. And so, with my right harty commendacions, I bid you
farewell. From the Haghe, the first of February, 1585.
   Your very loving frende,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honorable good frende sir Fraunces
Walsingham knight, principall secretory to the quenes majestie.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 86>
[} [\LETTER XXX. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 3RD FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretory, I have written to my lord treasourour for his
healpe to procure that I may have one thousand pioners out of
Englande, men very necessary for the service here, and not to be
well had in these partes. Whereof one hundred I would have to be
myners, and have written to Sir Walter Rawleighe to healpe
procure them out of his jurisdiction in Cornwall and Devon. For
the other nyne hundred, I hartely pray you to conferre with my
lord treasourour, and to put to your healpe that they may be had
out of dyvers shyres in Englande, here and there, where you
shall thincke they may be best taken. There was abuse in the
levye of those that were sent before, many of them being
househoulders, and maryed men, and of bodye not fit for this
service. I pray you lett there be care had in these, that they
may be single men and of apt bodyes. And I woulde be gladde to
heare from you with speade, whether they be to be had or not,
that I may cause mony to be readye at London for them. And yf
they be to be had, yf the taking of them up may be gone in hande
with in the
<P 87>
meane tyme it shalbe well, for I would have them here abowt the
ende of Aprill, and not before. And so with my right harty
commendacions, I bid you farewell. From the Haghe in Hollande,
the 3d. of February, 1585.
   Your very loving frende,
   R. Leycester.
[^POSTSCRIPT AUTOGRAPH^]
   Yf I may have these pioners, I desier to have them in a
redynes agenst the mydst of May.
   I besech ye lett me hear oftener from you.
   I must lett ye know all our tresure ys gonne, and have leyd
out iij or iiij=m= li. beside my expences, only for the causes
and service here. And how the tresure hath byn payd out lett the
awdytor tell ye, and yet he ys not able to tell ye all, but
before I cam, all was gonn, and many debts owing, and the
soldyers reddy to sterte, yet yt was thought that ther had byn
inough here tyll the end of Decembre, of the first money; nether
cam ther, as I now I find, over with the treasurer above 14,000
li. of the xx=m=., and he had but warant of me for 2,000 or
therabout, whereof xvij=c= li. was for our shipping, yet he
sayth he broght but 14,000 with him.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honourable good frende sir Fraunces
Walsingham knight, principall secretorye to the queenes
majestie.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 87>
[} [\LETTER XXXI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 4TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
<P 88>
   Good Mr. secretary, even as ye love the furtherance of this
servyce, send us money with all spede, for, as you shall
understand by Mr. Davyson, all our treasure ys gonn, and ye may
se, by experyence, how dowbtfull the wyndes ar to pass at your
wyll. I pray you also that you wyll obteyn lycence that we may
have men, and the captens I have sent over may be dyspached only
with hir majestys authorytye for the leavy of them.
   Mr. Norrys doth this day departe hence to Utrycht, whether
also I send all my horsmen. Yf we may have money and men from
Englond only to abyde the first brunt this sommer, I trust you
shall hear of great servyce to the honour and quyett of hir
majesty.
   The prince of Parma gyves yt out styll, and hath sent ageyn
to Antwerp, to provyde for hir majesties embassador, ether to
com thether or to Brusselles, only to make shew of yt, to brede
busses in these mens heddes here. The preparacion at Antwerp for
shipping ys not as ye have hard, for certen, nether his forces
to be feared, spetyally yf we may once gett before hand with our
men this spring. Here ys a man that doth offer to cure your
decease uppon loss of his lyffe. Fare ye well; in much hast,
this 4. of February.
   Yours assured,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honourable good frende Mr. secretory
Walsingham.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 89>
[} [\LETTER XXXII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 6TH FEBRUARY, 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretory, this bearer, monsieur Civile, retourneth well
inoughe, I thincke, satisfyed with the dealinges here. Yet do
not the estates thincke good to goe throughe with the matter
offred by him on the duke his master his behaulfe, partly
because they do not take it to be of so great importaunce as the
duke thincketh, and more specially because mony at this present
groweth skant with them, being to satisfye me for my allowaunce
monethly, and to paye their ould debtes, (which I covenanted
they shoulde do before I would take the gouvernment on me,) and
having some other payementes to make; so that, by their former
desordre and confusion in all thinges, a litle money is nowe at
the first more unto them then a great deal wilbe hereafter, when
they have overpassed these paymentes, and thinges shalbe settled
in good ordre. I have a meaning also to do the duke ere longe
some pleasure an other waye, which I hope shalbe well to his
lyking. And so, with my right harty commendacions, I bid you
farewell. From the Haghe, in Hollande, the vjth of February
1585.
   Your very loving frende,
   R. Leycester.
[^POSTSCRIPT AUTOGRAPH^]
   I have partly remembred my lord tresorer of a matter wherein
I have at large wrytten to my lord admyrall, wherein both you
there and we here may be better servyd, and hir majesty farr
less charged. I pray you further yt to my lord admyrall, who I
know wylbe very reddy therto.
<P 90>
   And for those portes here, I can assure you they have doun
great servyce, both in taking and burning of sondry of the
Dunkerkers, as also in reskewing dyvers shipps taken by the
enymye, both Englysh and Flemysh, and ij of the best and
greatest were cast away uppon the Goodwyns lately, with all ther
men and artyllery, save 4 or 5 maryners; iij small barkes on
your side wold ease all, as ther ys also on this side as many
and moe sett out, but ther ys more trust x tymes to ours to kepe
Dunkirk, than these here, for they mete with many frendes whom
they lett slypp.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honourable good frende sir Francis
Walsingham knight, principall secretory to the queenes majestie.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 90>
[} [\LETTER XXXIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO LORD BURGHLEY. 7TH
FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   My lord, there are two marchaunts of this countree, the one
of Middlebourge, called Mr. Jehan Cooman, bourgmaster of that
towne, the other, Jehan Berrhee, eschevin and senatour of
Amsterdam, who have a shipp with merchaundise taken coming from
St. Lucars in Spayne, by certeine shipps of warre of England in
October last, under pretence that they were the goods of the
king of Spaynes subjects, because there was found in the shipp a
bill of lading making mention that the goodes appertayned to a
marchaunt of Anwerp, which indeade was done to thintent that the
goodes should not be confiscat in Spayne; for that, since the
<P 91>
taking of Anwerp, all Anwerp-men are free from arrestes in
Spayne, and this manner of lading in other mens names is used
here, and allowed by an order of the estates, to thintent
thereby the goods and monie of this countreemen arrested in
Spayne and Portugall maie be gotten thence, and that those that
are here against the king maie have some kynd of trade thither.
   Theise two marchaunts are verie honest men, of good religion,
devoted to her majestie, and have suffred verie much for theis
countrees service. He in Anwerp, though he dwell in Anwerp, and
be therefore taken as reconcyled to the king of Spayne, yet is
he an honest man accompted, and doth no hurt but great good to
the cause. Theire humble suite to me is, to be meane to your
lordship that the said goodes, being a 100 pypes of oyle and 19
balles of cotton, maie either be delivered to themselves upon
good caution and assuraunce, or at least sequestred till
sentence be geven, doubting greatlie least yf their adversaries,
who are John Bird, Jo. Wattes, and John Stokes, should gett the
possession of them, they would distract them at meane pryces,
and dryve of thise men with long processe; which request seemeth
to me verie reasonable. I doe earnestlie praye your lordship to
cause good consideracion to be had of it, the rather the men
being so well affected. And so, with my right hartie
commendacions, I comitt your lordship to thallmightie. From the
Hage in Holland, the 7th of February 1585.
   Your lordships loving frende,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To the right honourable my very good lord, the
lord Burghley, lord highe treasourour of Englande, knight of
thordre, one of the lords of her majesties privie counsaile, and
master of her highnes wardes and liveryes.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 92>
[} [\LETTER XXXIV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 7TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   This vij. of February I receive your letter, with a pece of
lead in yt lyke a patern of a booke; I know not what yt meanes,
nether have ye wrytten any word of yt.
   The master of the hoye that lost Sir Thomas Cecylles hors, I
have putt him in prison, and great presumtyons ar ageinst him,
which shalbe tryed to the uttermost, for such felloes have doon
much harme, but no more than your great recourse to Calles now
of your merchauntes doe, which ys so notable as wyll cause all
here to runne at lyberty yf ye hold yt on, for all thinges doth
pass to Calles. I besech ye consider of yt.
<P 93>
   For the duke of Bullyns matter I wrote somwhat to ye of yt,
but ther ys no aparaunce in dede that yt can be trew that so
much vyttell can come to that place. I beleave ther ys some
other matter in yt.
   I am sorry hir majestie wyll not suffer the Ireshe soldyers
to come hether; hir majestie shuld not have byn at a peny charge
for them; ther servyce in Ireland wyll not doe hir that servyce
that ther want here wyll hinder hir in a hier degre.
   I fear the brutes the prince of Parma doth gyve out wyll
prove trew, which ys, that hir majesty lookes rather for a peace
than to goe any further into any warr, and making no questyon at
all, whan he doth se the worst we can doe, but to have what
peace he wyll at hir handes, at all tymes. What hurt yt doth, ye
wyll, I fear, se to sone, for yf [\it\] be once setledd in these
mens heddes, I warant ye they wold provyde for themselves, yf
they had ther forces in ther handes, well inough; yt ys the
thing hir majestie nedeth least desier, and sonest wylbe offred
hir, yf she hold fast a lytle for the warr; otherwyse, farewell
all these countreys, and ye shall never have peace but a
shamfull one. And yf that shalbe thought mete, yf I bring not an
offer, and a seking to hir for peace, or half the rest of hir
money be spent, lett me loose hir favour and my credytt with hir
majestie. But to make shew of your parte to desier a peace, and
procede not in manyfest actyon of warr first, and with that
ernest shew indede which apperteynes to so weighty a cause, look
for no peace for England, whosoever elles can have yt: and be
not deceaved, for I know yt, and doe fear the sequell of yt.
   The enymye doth as asuredly know what conferences have byn
about sir Jo. Smyth's imbassage, and how ernest hir majesty ys
for peace, how hardly she hath spoken ageinst the councellors of
this enterprise of the Low Countreys, as any ye that ar at home;
and by devyces ys brought hether, to corrupt men of best
<P 94>
credytt. But finding by my preparatyon to the contrary, and my
sending for men into England, doth hold them all here back from
any thought yet that waye, wherein someway I know I endanger
myself at the enymyes handes, for his practyces to my none hurt,
for he ys perswaded that I am a great hinderar to peace, and
much of this here donn leyd uppon me. Beside, he hath
intelligences partyculer out of Englond of me, whereby yt may
the rather provoke him to seke my ryddance. But I am resolvyd of
the protectyon of the Almighty ageinst all devylls and his
enymyes, and that he wyll defend all that constantly trust in
him. I have no interest, God doth know, in desier of warr; but
the state of our prince and countrey requyring that ys done to
be for there safty, I think this lyfe well imployd for there
servyce, and xx tymes shall I be more wylling to be imployed in
an honorable and good peace for them, which may be, I think, yf
hir majesty take the way and follow yt.
   Some flyng tale hath byn told me here, that hir majesty shuld
myslyke with the name of "excellencye." Suerly I know the great
encreace hit hath geven me, but that I had the same at all
straungeres handes that ever cam into England, synce I was made
by hir majesty an erll, and abrode where she hath sent me. Yf I
had delighted, or wold have received tytles, I refused a tytle
hyer than excellency, as Mr. Davyson, yf you ask him, wyll tell
ye; and that I my none self refused most ernestly that, and, yf
I might have donn yt, this also, but I have had this both
wrytten and spoken to me whan I used but the place of hir
majesties master of hir horse, and both then and now asmuch to
hir majesties honor as any advauncement to me, as one that
desyreth no name but my none name, longer than I may serve hir
majesty to hir honour and good lyking.
   I have sent the audytor over with the accomptes here, and, yf
hir majesty wyll looke for my good servyce, there must be hast
of
<P 95>
money hether, for here ys none left, and we have now above
viij=c= horse to pay.
   So, in som hast, I comytt ye to God; at the Hage, this vij.
of February.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To Mr. secretary Walsingham.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 95>
[} [\LETTER XXXV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO THE LORD TREASURER,
THE LORD CHAMBERLAIN, THE VICE CHAMBERLAIN, AND MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 8TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   My very good lords, I have to my great discomfourt receyved
from you her majesties great mislyke of my acceptaunce of this
<P 96>
gouvernment, and that she will by no meanes avowe, but rather
disavowe wholy, that which is done therein. I was somewayes a
very unfortunat man, I must confesse, that founde scant of her
majesties wonted favour towardes me before my going to take so
great and weightye a charge as this in hande, not being ignorant
of the infinite hazardes that I must put my own poore estate
unto, bothe lyfe and all. Neverthelesse, the Lord God doth
knowe, unto whose mercye I do appeale, the very aboundaunce of
my faithfull harty love, borne even to the preservation of her
sacred person, and the care of her prosperous raigne over our
poore endaungered countrye, was only cause thereof. But, my
lords, thus muche hope had I allwayes notwithstanding, in the
great goodnes of her majestie, that in so weightye a cause as
this is, her majestie would, before she had condemned me so
farre, have hearde what reasons have moved me to do this I have
done, above her commission or commaundement. And I doubt not but
her majestie and you all shall well fynde, that I have
adventured more to do her majestie acceptable service thereby,
then to do my selfe eyther honour or good. And as your lordships
have had good experience heretofore of the uncertaintyes of
these passages; so was I here xliij dayes before I did once
heare worde out of Englande.
   And, for this matter, to satisfye eyther her majestie or your
lordships as it ought to do, must stand upon sondry reasons
which necessitye brought fourthe at this tyme to cause me to
accept of this gouvernment, which I had delivered to Mr. Davison
to declare bothe to her and to your lordships, I do moste humbly
beseche your good lordships to examine all those reasons but
indifferently. Yf they seame to your wisdomes other then suche
as might well move a true and a faythfull carefull man to her
majestie to do as I have done, I do desire for my mistaking
offense to beare the burden of it, which can be no greater then
that which her majestie hathe allreadye decreed, to disavowe me
with all displeasure and disgrace; a matter of as great reproche
and griefe as ever can
<P 97>
happen to any man. And according to her will, which I perceyve
is ment by her majestie, I wilbe readye (seeing it is not
otherwise to be presently used) to obey her pleasure, yf it were
presently to give it, without any more adoe, over agayne to
them. But respecting what hinderaunce it may be to her majesties
service at this tyme, and to the whole cause, I trust I shall
not offende your lordships, nor her majestie, to give this
simple advise, that it may pleas her to send somme nobleman with
all speade whome it shall lyke her to supply my place, according
to her first meaning, and to revoke me, which I will humbly
obey, and take it as a matter from God, who can and will correct
the wayes of synners, protesting in his presence, and by the
beliefe I have in Chryste, that I have done nothing in this
matter, but, to my iudgement, of suche consequence for her
majesties service, besides the furderaunce of the cause here,
as, yf lyfe, lande and goodes had lyne upon it, I must have
adventured it as for an acceptable service. And yet when I sett
my foote on lande I no more imagined of any suche matter to be
offred me, or more then was by her majesty and the estates
contracted, then I thought to be king of Spayne; nor till I came
to this town xij dayes after: and yet was there some were
affinitye with this by that contracted betwene her and the
estates.
   I have no cause to have played the foole thus farre for
myselfe; first, to have her majesties displeasure, which no
kyngedome in the worlde culd make me willingly to deserve; next,
to undoe myselfe in my later dayes; to consume all that should
have kept me all my lyfe, in one haulfe-yeare. And so muche
gayne have I heare by it as I have lyved and spent only of my
own since I came, without ever having pennye or groate from
them, neyther shall gett so muche by them all here, yf I had
served them this xij monethes, as I have spent since I sawe her
majestie and your lordships laste. But I must thancke God of
all, and am most hartely grieved at her majesties heavy
displeasure. I neyther desire to lyve, nor to see my country,
with it. For yf I have not done her majesty good service at this
tyme, I shall never hope to do her
<P 98>
any, but will withdrawe me into some out-corner of the worlde,
where I will languishe out the rest of my fewe, to many, dayes,
prayng ever for her majesties longe and prosperous lyfe, and
with this only comforte to lyve an exile, that this disgrace
hathe happened for no other cause but for my mere regarde of her
majesties estate, being driven to this choyse, eyther to put
myselfe into her handes for doing that which was moste probably
best for her service, or elles loose her that advantage which,
at that present lett slippe, was not possibly to be gotten for
her agayne.
   I doubt not but ere this Mr. Davison hathe presented to her
majestie my own letter, and acquaynted all your lordships with
suche reasons as have moved me to deale as I have done, who was
dispatched hence fower dayes before I receyved your lordships
letters, leaving me in opinion yf her majestie had not thus
conceaved of it as she nowe dothe, that I would have thought my
service had deserved more thanckes. I shall nowe attend her
majesties furder pleasure, not daring wryte to herselfe being
thus offended, but will humbly desire your lordships good
constructions of my doinges to hir highnes, yf you shall fynde
the consideration worthie, with your honourable and frendly
meanes in my behaulfe, being a man absent, but moste faythfull
and loyall to my moste dread soveraigne mistres, and so wilbe to
my lyves ende, and to my power humbly thanckefull to your
lordships all, for the good favour you shall shewe herein
towardes me. And so will pray unto God to keape you all in his
feare with longe lyfe. From the Haghe, the 8=th= of Februarye,
1585.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honourable my very good lords the
lord highe treasourour of Englande and the lord chamberlayne,
and my very good frendes Mr. vice-chamberlaine and Mr. secretory
Walsingham, and to every of them.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 99>
[} [\LETTER XXXVI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 8TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretary, being lothe to trouble my lords with to longe
a letter, maketh me thus bould to use some addition to you,
being not only grieved but wounded to the harte. For it is more
then death unto me, that her majestie should be thus ready to
interpret allwayes hardly of my service, specially before it
might pleas her to understande my reasons for that I do. For my
own parte, I am perswaded hitherto there could not any better
service be done unto her majestie in these partes, and yf some
other man had done it, yt coulde not be but it had bene muche
better accepted: at the least I thinke she would never have so
condemned any [\other\] man before she had heard him. And, undre
her highnes pardon and favour, I dare referre the judgement of
this matter, when it shalbe duely examined and hearde, to her
majesties own selfe, or to my worst enemyes, wheresoever they
be, muche rather to any or to all her privye counsayle. All her
majestie can laye to my charge
<P 100>
ys going a little furder then she gave me commission for. Yf the
matter be well considered, the steppe forwarde is not so great,
yf my authoritye contracted before betwene her majestie and the
states be well perused, and I thancke God there is no
treachourye nor falshoode in this I am blamed for. The Lord
graunt her majestie paciently to consider by this my doing
wherein she is any waye damnefyed, or furdur engaged to the
estates then she was before.
   Her majestie I do remember well indeade, and so may you, howe
before all my lords she seamed to mislyke that I should take any
other charge then as her generall, or to make any othe to them
here, any manner of waye. I tould her majestie lykewyse, in the
same presence, it was then to no purpose for me to goe into
these countryes; for yf it were but to be her generall only of
v=m=. men, Mr. Norrise had that charge alreadye, and better able
to discharge it then I. I did lykewise put her bothe in
remembrance of her contract with the states, which had allowed
me farre more authoritye then that, and of the dealing of my
lord treasourour and of yourselfe also with them abowt a furder
enterteignment for me, as in respect I should be their officer
as well as her majesties, in which I referre myselfe to both
your reportes, being then present. For they alwayes aunswered
me, there was no doubt but they would deale with me as well as
ever they did with the prince of Orange. But her majestie indead
then would not heare of it, thoughe I made petition to be
discharged of the journey. Yet, afterwards, in speaking with
her, I founde her very well content I should receyve any thinge
from their handes whatsoever, so it mought not proceade from
herselfe, but of themselves. I did desire you, sir, at that
tyme, to move her majestie most earnestly for my stay at home,
telling you howe much I should undoe myself, and do her majestie
no service, going after that manner. And, yf I be not
forgeatfull, it seamed then to you lykewise, that her majestie
was willing inoughe that I should receyve suche charge and
enterteignment as, of themselves, the
<P 101>
estates would lay upon me and give me: but I will not stande
greatly hereupon.
   But, admitt me to be even acccording as her majestie did
contract with the estates, ys it not there agreed I should be
the generall of their warres and armyes, as well as of her
majesties? Was I not there placed as chiefe counsailour of the
estate amonge them, and two nominated also by her majestie to
assist me? I suppose in this place it was not ment, neyther for
me nor them, as counsailours for the warres only, for then I am
sure there should have bene named more famous captaines to
assist me. Besides, I am there authorized to deale in monye
matters, and myntes, with such lyke, which are mere civile
causes. Yf, then, it be so that this authoritye was given me
before, by her majesties and the estates contract, and that they
would, partly for the honour borne to hir majestie, and partly
for that they would have the worlde knowe they relye wholy upon
her, make choyse of me, so farre interessed allreadye amonge
them, and give me a tytle and place which some other must have
had, as shall playnly appeare to her majestie by Mr. Davison,
and that hir majesty is neyther furder charged therby, nor by
any means drawen into any furder action or bonde, then she was
before, and that of necessitye some one must have had the place,
I woulde fayne knowe, yf any other had had it but one wholye hir
majesties, whether she had not bene disappointed of every parte
of that she looked for: specially for a good peace for herselfe
and Englande? And whether the sure payement of her waged
souldiors by them, or the strengthe of all the garrisons placed
by them, or the navye and mariners of these countreyes, had
bene, without this authoritye to one of hers, at hir majesties
commaundement or no? Yf then, by taking this place upon me, hir
majestie being thereby no waye to be charged, eyther by the king
of Spayne or otherwise, since it was the estates own election,
and a matter merly done by themselves, to offre these great
advauntages to one of her own, methinckes it should not receyve
so harde a construction, seing by the placing of me, the
<P 102>
only benefite and greatest honour dothe growe to hir majesties
selfe every waye.
   For my own particular, I knowe it had bene farre better
another had had it then I. But for hir majestie, yf hir gracious
good opinion were not prejudiced allready against me in this
matter, bothe hirself and all others must thincke it is muche
better for hir service in the handes of one of hir own, then of
any other whosoever. But yet I am nowe sory that ever I was
employed in this service. For yf any man of a great nomber elles
had brought suche a matter to passe for hir, I am sure he should
have had, instead of displeasure, many thanckes. But suche is
nowe my wretched case, as for my faythfull, true and loving
harte to hir majestie and my countrye, I have utterly undone
myselfe; for favour, I have disgrace; and for rewarde, utter
spoyle and ruyne. I could have taken warning of this before, yf
I would have doubted so muche of hir majesties goodnes, or have
cared more for my quyet and ease at home then for hir service
abroade. And I am not so riche but I might bothe well have
spared my charge, and saved the labour of so daungerous a
journey.
   But, to conclude, yf to make hir majestie to have the whole
commaundement of all these provinces, of their forces by sea and
lande, of their townes and of their treasure, with knowledge of
all the secrettes of their estate, yea and to have brought her
what peace she woulde, besides divers wayes and meanes lykely to
have eased a great parte of her charges, only by taking upon me
the name of gouvernour, is so eveill taken as it hathe deserved
dishonour, discredite, disfavour, with all grefes that may be
laide upon a man, I must receyve it as deserved of God and not
of my quene, whome I have reverenced with all humilitye, and
whome I have loved with all fydelitye. Hit shall ende thus, that
as I fynde myselfe moste deapely wounded, and seeing hir
majesties good favour and good opinion drawen from me, that she
conceyveth I have or do belyke seake rather my own glorye then
her true service, not forgetting that some suche wordes were
used of me when
<P 103>
I made suyte to her majesty to have a fewe lords over with me, I
do humbly beseche her majestie by you, for I know my wryting to
hirselfe having these conceipts of me shall but trouble her, to
graunt me leave, as soone as she shall appoint one here to
supplye my place for her better service, which I desire with all
speade, and the sooner the better, to go lyve in somme obscure
corner of the earthe, where I will ende these grievous dayes in
true prayer to God for her. And, as the Lord doth knowe, when
she thought me any way touched with vayne glorye, I had no cause
of vayne glorye to boste of. Yf I may glorye in any thinge, it
must be, I see, in the crosses of this worlde, whiche allmightye
God strengthen me unto. And so, thincking every daye a yeare
till I may receave ordre and dispatche of this place, I bid you
hartily farewell. From the Haghe in Hollande, the 8=th= of
February 1585.
   Your loving frende.
[\ADDRESSED\] To my honourable good frende sir Fraunces
Walsingham, knight, principall secretorye to the queenes
majestie.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 103>
[} [\LETTER XXXVII. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 7TH
FEBRUARY, 1585-6.\] }]
   My very good lord, Your last letters come to my hands war by
your lordship written at the Hage the 29. of January, by which I
<P 104>
was glad to perceave [\you\] had receaved my letters sent by Mr.
Atye and my son; which war made old letters by the contrary
wynd, which of late hath bene so constant to hang long in on
cost, as ether your lordship there have cause, or we heare, to
wish it; for it holdeth strongly ether west, which pleseth vs to
send, but not to heare; or els in the est, which discontenteth
ether of vs in contrary manner.
   By your lordships letters I fynd manny thyngs of my letters
answered, and so I shall be hable to satisfye hir majesty; but,
to be playn with your lordship, in a few words, I, and other
your lordships poore frends, find hir majesty so discontent with
your acceptation of the government ther, befor you had
advertised and had hir majestys opinion, that, althovgh I, for
my own part, judg this action both honorable and profitable, yet
hir majesty will not endure to heare any speche in defence
therof. Nevertheless, I hope a small tyme shall alter this hard
concept in hir majesty, whereunto I have allredy and shall not
desist to oppose myself, with good and sound reasons to move hir
majesty to alter her hard opinion.
   But, to end this wrytyng, I could not but to accompany this
gentilman, Horatio Palavicino, with my letter, whom, for his
<P 105>
wisdom and all other good quallites, I nede not to commend to
your lordship, being so well knowen and approved to your
lordship as he is. From my house in Westminster, 7. February
1585.
   Your lordships assuredly at command,
   W. Burghley.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 114>
[} [\LETTER XLI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 14TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretory, this gentleman, sir Robert Jarmine, hathe in
my knowledge causes of great weight which force him at this tyme
to come over. He myndeth to retourne hither within a moneth or
therabowtes, and for that tyme he may be best spared hence. I
<P 115>
have founde him to be very wise and stowt, and most willing and
ready to this service, and he hathe come hither as well
appointed as any that hathe commen over. I very hartely pray you
to accompt of him as of one specially recommended to you from
me, and yf he shall neade your favour in his causes, that you
will the rather affourd it him for my sake: I wilbe behoulden to
you for it. And so with my right harty commendacions I committ
you to the Allmightye. From the Haghe in Hollande, the xiiijth
of February, 1585.
   Your very loving frende,
   R. Leycester.
[^POSTSCRIPT AUTOGRAPH^]
   I nede not commend this gentleman to ye, but assuredly he ys
gretly to be estemed. I besech further him yf he shall nede your
favour.
   I did wryte very ernestly to ye, and I think to my lord
tresurer also, touching a request one munsieur de Meux made unto
me at Dort; he ys the hye-bayly ther, a very honest, religious,
constant, stout gentleman, one that hath gonn thorow all these
troubles with great constancy. His only sonn ys taken by the
enymye; they wyll not release him, nor sett him at any ransome,
for the fathers sake. He desyred Saburo, by whose meanes he
hoped to redeme him. The gentleman ys worthy of a greater
favour, and able to serve hir majesty many ways in this
countrey; he thinkes some lack in me that he receaves no answere
or comfort all thys while. I pray ye, sir, favour him further,
and ye shall do hir majesty a good service in yt, and yet I dout
not to get some other in Dunkirk also with him.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honourable good frende sir Francis
Walsingham knight, principall secretorye to the queenes
majestie.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 116>
[} [\LETTER XLII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 15TH FEBRUARY, 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretorye, I opened the packett which this bearer
comming from my lord Willoughbye will deliver you, because there
was a letter in it for me. By that letter I fynde but doubtfull
aunsweres from the king of Denmarcke, and therefore do thincke
it not amisse yf you staye the imparting to her majestie of the
contents of these letters, untill her pleasure shalbe fully
knowen touching the matters of these countryes, nowe after the
arrivall of Mr. Davison. Yf she go throughly on with these
causes, she shall not need to make doubt of having frendes
inowe. So, with my harty commendacions, I bid you fare well.
From the Haghe the xvth of February, 1585.
   Your very loving frende,
   R. Leycester.
   If sir William Pellham be not hastened hither, or some suche
man of judgement in martiall affayres, we shall hardly do that
good I wishe for here.
[\ADDRESSED.\] To my honourable good frende sir Francis
Walsingham knight, principall secretorye to the queenes
majestie.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 126>
[} [\LETTER XLIV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 18TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretary, these men here doe very ernestly press me to
be a sutor to hir majesty, that hit will please her to consider
of the traffyq of hir marchauntes for clothes, whether these
tounes in Holland and Zeland may not be thought convenyent
places for the
<P 127>
utterance of ther clothes, as they hope all yt wyll; and, yf yt
so be found good, than wold they be sutors to have them com
hether, offring all manner of good usage, and in what place or
places so ever the merchantes wyll lyke best they shalbe
provyded for to ther contentacions, without tax, or talliage, or
any manner of charges uppon ther merchandyzes. For my none parte
I have somewhat travelled to understand what vent they may have,
and I find plainly, yf you hold your hand from lycenses, and
forbid going to any other places eastward from Hamboro
hetherward, and to the Haunces but only some suche nomber of
clothes as heretofore ye have allowed them, that here wylbe a
notable mart for them.
   Amsterdame, or Enchuson (a place I lyke best for some
causes), or Rotradame, any of these iij, wylbe very apt places,
and, with Mydelborow in Zeland, ye shall not only be sure our
clothes shall have spedy utterance but greatly content these
people, and I am perswaded yf all other places be well examyned
ye wyll fynd this the surest every way. For alredy our clothes
goe away apace from Mydelborow, but yf the hole trade come
hether, all the east partes wyll seke hether, and here ys no
fear of any arestes or exactyons, except we offer them to to
much wrong. I pray ye, sir, consider of yt, and with some spede,
for that the king of Denmark hath promysed to deall for the
Stedes, and ye had nede take hede of them, the king of Spain
hath a great hand over them, spetyally of the Count de Embden,
who, I can assure you, ys wholy at his comaundment; his letters
hath byn taken.
   These men, also, doe offer some place, or places, for your
woll of England, and wyll deall with nether French nor Spanyesh
woolles yf hir majesty wyll, and ye may utter here a great
quantyty to those that make sayes, and bayes, and other wollen
workes, which shall only spend our Englysh wooll: and I wyll
warrant your merchantes never found such markettes for ther
clothes as they shall doe here, yf they wyll not skatter to
other places. Thys being a matter of great weight I thought to
wryte yt to ye, and that I may hear from ye as sone as may be,
at least that hit be
<P 128>
not forgotten to these folkes, howsoever ye deall with the lord
lyvetenant here. God preserve and kepe hir majesty from all
evyll, and with longest and happiest yeres to rayne. From the
Hage, this xviij. of February.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   Hit is thought, that yf our woolles cam over hether into
Holland, that yt wold draw a great nomber out of Flaunders
hether that occupie wollen occupacions from the parte of the
enemye. For God's sake remember money, with all possible spede;
and sir Wylliam Pellam,
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my honourable good frende sir Fraunces
Walsingham, knight, principall secretorye to the queenes
majestie.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 128>
[} [\LETTER XLV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 21 FEBRUARY, 1585-6.\] }]
   This Monday, the xxj. of February, after I had dyspatched my
other letters to ye, my lord Wyllowby aryved here very well, and
doth tell me how very well affected he hath left the king of
Denmarke toward hir majesty, that, for hir owen service, he wyll
mak warr uppon any prince, and ys content, uppon any least word
from
<P 129>
me, to lett ij=m= of the best horsmen in all his countrey to com
to me, and they may better com that way, I find, than any way
out of Jermanye, to serve this countrey, spetyally in East
Fresland and Gelderland.
   I perceave, also, that the princes of Germany ar mervellosly
gladd of hir majesties dealing with the king of Spayn. The duke
of Sax ys becom a new man synce his mariage, and hath sent very
playn messages to the emperour; he hath lykewyse agreed with
sondry princes to send to the French king, and to perswade him
to leave his prosecuting the king of Navare and the
protestantes; yf not, they protest not only to stey all succors
for him out of Germany, but to ayd and asyst the sayd king of
Navare, with all the force they may.
   I fynd yt plainly, yf her majesty send any man of countenance
now to them, and to com this way, though yt werr but boddeleye,
I dare warrant ye shall find them in an other manner of tune
then ever they werr yet, synce hir majesties tyme.
   The ellector of Culloyn received letters ij days [\ago\] to
the same effect, touching the princes of Germanyes devotyon, as
also of the duke of Sax August.
   The count of Emden ys stark naught, and the king of Spains
for lyfe, only I wyshe hir majesty to send some one to his
brother, count John, whos hart ys almost kyld synce he was in
England, and languysheth in great mallincholly, finding so small
comfort ther, as he sayth, yf hir majesty had geven him any good
comfort, his brother shuld never have don any thing but what she
wold. He is so decayd and out of comfort, as yt ys thought his
brother wyll shortly gett the Nort, and another place next the
sea called Gryte, of good importance, but the other called
Denord ys able to doe very great servyce agenst the enymye now,
yf yt werr at hir majesties dewtye, but ther must be no tyme
lost in yt.
   Hamborow ys a villanous town, and wholy the king of Spaynes;
<P 130>
my lord Wyllouby was in great danger to be taken in their
territorye. But, yf yt please hir majesty to bestow hir
merchants in other places, I beleive veryly more to their
proffytt but far more for ther surety, which, yf yt may be, I
besech ye give me but a spedy incling.
   We ar here in good forwardnes as well for sea as land; ye
shall hear shortly that our contrybutions wylbe very much
encreased, spetyally yf her majesties countenance contynew. I
have wonne them to dyvers very large pointes alredy, for they se
I only serve hir majesty and ther cause, and do venture both my
lyfe and my lyving for them, and I assure ye I find great favour
with them, spetyally with the honest councellors and the comon
people.
   Paule Buys ys a very vyllayn, a dissembler, an athest, and a
practyser to make himself rych and great, and no boddy elles;
but ye shall see I wyll doe well inough with him, and that
shortly. He ys the most hated man generally that ever I knew in
any state: but kepe this, I pray ye, to yourself. Ortell ys holy
his, and he hath alredye newes of hir majesties myslyke of me,
and I warrant ye he hath taken advantage of yt, and yet wyll not
seme to me to know any thing; but I am here every way to hard
for him. He wold seme altogether to be for Englond, and in troth
he doth skorn us.
   Hir majestie never had such a waye unto the world to daunt
hir enymys as she hath now. I pray God she may take the offers
of hir parliament in tyme: she wyll find herself happy. And, in
hast, fare ye well, the shypp steying this beror.
   Your most assured,
   R. Leycester.
To my honourable good frend sir Frauncis Walsingham, knight, her
majesties principall secretarie.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 131>
[} [\LETTER XLVI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 22ND FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   I must nedes trowble ye as oft as occasion may serve, albeyt
I can hear nothing from you, whether I shall contynew in my
servyce or be cashed, and being loth to loose tyme whilst I am
hear, I have alredy proceded with these men for the leavy of an
army, as the only way in dede to help and save all; for,
whatsoever discourse men may make to you ther, I find by all the
wysest and best experymented men here, that if we stand but
uppon a defensyve warr, all wyll be lost, as all was almost
quyte gonne when I cam hether, as I wrote unto you, and chifely
for that men were out of hope to resyst the enymye in the fyld,
but he had way to doe what he lysted in all places; he was able
both to besiege towens and to anoye all places where he lysted,
and no man to make hedd with force ageinst him, every man
looking but to his singell charge, in this towen and that towen,
and none to commaunde or dyrect for the hole: and ye shall se
now, that a meane comander shalbe able to doe more than was donn
this good while.
   We have alredy, concluded and in making reddy, almost xl good
shippes and good cromsters, beside xxv smaler vesselles to runne
upp and down the ryvers, well furnyshed; so that, for the sea,
we wyll provyde well inough.
<P 132>
   For the land hit ys almost concluded, also, that we shall
leavye iiij=m= horse, the most reyters, beside those we have
alredy, for yf we may mach the enymye with horse, I dowbt not
for the rest; yet he hath iij=m=. Spanyardes aryved a month
agoe, and I hear he ys preparing men in Germany.
   Much adoe have I had with these men to bring them to consider
of this matter, for they imagyn ther places inpregnyble, and doe
not remember how the people groe wery of ther contynewall
burden, and standing only uppon defence. They contynewally lost
towens, cyttyes, and almost ij hole provynces, Flanders and
Brabant, all which, yf they had had but vj=m= men in the fyld,
they had saved; but I may boldly say it, for I am well informyd
of yt, they were both carelesly and neglegently lost, and
assuredly many more had byn gonn but for hir majesties comfort
and countenance, and yet wylbe, yf we shall doe but as others
have donn. Wherefore I have byn very round, and the rounder, to
be playn with ye, that I wold rather torn myself out of service
for such a cause than to be torned owt otherwyse, as perhapps ye
among ye ther have resolyd. And my dealing hath taken such good
success, as now they procede very willingly in all thinges that
I move to them for ther defence, and every man wylling to
contrybute, and to enlardge their contrybutyons, now they hope
somwhat shall be donn for ther money, as, God wylling, ther
shall, yf I tarry by yt; praing ye, ageyn and ageyn, to send
away sir Wylliam Pellam. They here have hard so much of him as
almost they beleave in him.
   Hir majesty must think that this servyce standes hir more
uppon than all hir debtes, yf they be a C=m= li., and the
prosperity therof must bring hir, not only safetye to hir state
and person, but the saving of many a C=m= li. hereafter. Besyde,
sir, yf my poore advyce may be hard, as I have wrytten yt to ye
and my lord tresorer heretofore, hir [\majesty\] shuld send with
all spede into Germany to the princes, to encourage them,
spetyally a gentleman of some quallyty to the duke of Sax, to
congratulatt his mariag
<P 133>
with the howse of Hawnalt, who is the ablest and noblest
gentleman in all Germany and a great prince; and, beside that he
wyll take himself bound to hir majesty, the old duke wyll take
it most kindly, for he loveth his yong wyffe so well as
whosoever sendes to him therabout he useth all the thankfullnes
in the world to him. He hath sent of late a stout messag to the
emperour, and hath refused to gyve any audyence or access to the
French kinges comyssary. Seguro hath ben greatly enterteyned at
his handes, and loged in his own howse.
   Yf Palavasyn com not away ye marr all. Gyttory ys almost
madd, having wrytten into Germany of hir majesties gracyous
dealing in their cause, and that Pallavasyn and he were both on
the way; now Gyttory lyeth styll at Harlem, and almost
desperatt, yet doe I comfort him by messages, to lett him know
that I myselfe have not hard this month from England. God send
them better whan they com next.
   The king of Denmark doth marvellously love hir majesty, as my
lord Wyllowby telles me; he hath sent me very kind messages by
my lord, and doth offer to let me have ij=m= of his best
horsmen, and best captens to lead them; and lykewise to send his
own sonne, yf I think yt good, and that it may any way advance
hir majesties servyce.
   Thus ye may se how greatly hir majesty may further both hir
own good servyce and the servyce of all christendome, yf hit
shall please hir. And bycause she hath alwayes harped uppon a
peace, lett all wyse men judge whether ther be any way in the
world for hir majesty to have a good peace but this way; yea,
and the more show of princes good wylles that she may procure,
the better and surer must yt be for hir. Well, I can doe no more
but open my pore conceattes, and pray to God to dyrect hir
majesties hart to doe that which may be most for his glorye and
best for hirselfe and realme, and so commytt you to his safe
protectyon. At the
<P 134>
Hage, from whence I goe toward Utrycht uppon Saturday next; this
xxij. of February.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   I besech ye, Mr. secretary, lett not the pore soldyers be
forgotten, and the rather for that we shall goe very shortly to
the fyld; at the least to have a flying camp of iij or 4000 men,
to doe very necessary and nedefull servyce.
   The count Hollock ys a most wylling and obedient servant, and
surely wyll doe well, and begyns to leave his drynking. Hir
majesty is much beholden to the elector Truxy, and he ys able to
doe great servyce; he ys very pore but very wyse.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my honourable good frend Mr. secretarye
Walsingham.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 134>
[} [\LETTER XLVII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 24TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   The messenger which had my last letters was reternyd back by
whether ageyn, which causeth me to make my letters as freshe to
ye as may be, styll; and, touching the encrease of allowance to
<P 135>
our former rate sett down, which was ij=cm= florins by the
month; fynding yt very skant to descharge that which this sommer
servyces shall require, I have procured at the states handes,
and with best wyll at the countreyes handes, to gyve for iiij
monthes ij=cm= florins more, with which I trust ther wylbe good
servyce donn, and I have not byn idell nor neglygent in cauling
uppon these men for this matter, and other very nedefull, though
I find many of them slak inough in furthering those thinges that
be nedefull for themselves. I cannott blame the countreys to
myslyke with them as they have donn. Well, I hope now the
gretest matter ys past, this money being so redyly agreed unto
at length; and whosoever shall suplye the place for hir majesty
here, shall find a good preparation.
   I have, lykewyse, mustered all our men, and to be payd untyll
the xij. of February, but not our horsemen. I stey tyll I com to
Utryght, which shalbe within viij days after this, yf wether
wyll suffer me. I have changed many garisons upon some smale
suspition, but, I thank God, I find all men wylling to serve for
hir majesties sake, and I trust no place at this day to be
feared, where any garyson ys. I am about to make Lylle and
Lyfskynhose somwhat stronger; places of great importance. I have
lerned to be of a good nature synce I cam hether, for I hope to
sett the French king and the king of Spain together by the
eares, as well as they love, or this day month, and cost hir
majesty never a grote. I trust ye shall very shortly hear of som
towns of importance to be had into our handes.
   I find by the muster-master that the bandes be wonderfully
decayed, though many sleyttes were used, as he saith, to deceave
him, and wyll save hir majesty a good deall, I think; he ys not
yet retornyd, but a very wyse stout fellow he ys, and very
carefull to serve thorouly hir majesty. I am gladd I named him
to yt. I wold he had byn here at the beginning; but yf I tarry
here I
<P 136>
wyll be sure we wyll have men for our money. Hetherto I was not
able to use the servyce of v=c=. Englyshe soldyers beside the
garrysons of Flushing and Bryll, which places I styrr not. Ther
are ij lytle places which I meane to gett the government of, and
shalbe no charge to hir majesty, and yet of as great importance
as any of the other almost.
   These men be mervellously pleasyd with me that they perceave
I prepare forces for the fyld, for yt ys the only way to brydell
and overthrow the enymy, and to putt in hart these people, who
care not what they gyve so they know they have men in the fyld
to defend them, spetyally in the somer tyme. Wherefore, Mr.
secretary, yf hir majesty wyll looke for honour and good
servyce, send away Mr. Pellam; we have no such man to govern the
armye of all the men they have here, nor any comparable to those
I have brought alredy. They have very few that ar any thing
able. I wold I had the ij Italians that Pallavasyn promysed me;
but, seing I trust the Spanish shall have no cause to trowble
Irland, I wold, yf I shuld tarry here, gyve one of my fingers to
have Mr. Bingam here but iiij months. I dyd think ther had byn
both more and better choyce of captens than I can find here, and
therfore ther ys the more nede of such as he ys, for surely I am
in very good opinion of happy success, I find all men so willing
to this servyce. I besech ye, yf ye find hir majesty well
disposyd, remember Bingam, but first dispatch away sir William
Pellam, whose abode one month now may hinder us greatly here.
   There ys an other matter concerning Emden of very great
importance; I have wrytten alredy thereabout to ye; he ys a very
enymye to this countrey, and fast to the king of Spayn, and doth
chifely vyttell the enymye; yf he were not, we shuld get
Groyning in xx days, and all that part of Freseland the enymye
now holdeth.
<P 137>
Thus, having scrybled in much hast, I comytt you to the Lord. At
the Hag this xxiiij. of February.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   I pray you remember that I may receive answere to the partes
of my letters, for I have no coppy of my requestes. Forget not
money, money; and I wyll never press for any more than hir
majesty hath promysed these countreys alredy for this yere.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my honourable good frend Mr. secretary
Walsingham.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 137>
[} [\LETTER XLVIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSINGHAM, 26TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretary, yesterday being the xxv. of February, I wrote
unto you. This day, having occasion of a messenger going over, I
thought good to lett you knowe, that there came one of this
councell to me, and in verye honest sort told me, that I could
not forgett what brutes the prince of Parma had geven out
touching hir majestyes disposytion for to have peace with the
king of Spain. "I have received," sayth he, "now a lettre from a
frend of myne in London, who dothe wryte, that a Spanish
marchant, one Lewis de Pace, was gonn into Spain with all hast,
uppon a sudden, a month agon, and thought to be not without the
knowledge of some councellor, and that some secretly devyned,
that hit was to procure
<P 138>
some spech of peace, but," sayth he, "I wyll not beleave yt, for
yf hir majesty had had that minde, I am suer she wold never have
gon thus farr with us here, nether can all the Paces in England
or Spain cause the king of Spain to speake or seke a pece so
sone as this course she doth take with him. And we trust that
hir majesty wyll never doe herself so much dyshonour, nor us
that have comytted ourselves unto hir so much wronge, as to take
any such course whereby that king shall receive so great
encouragement, to hir owen harme and ours; for," quod he, "hir
majesty knoweth not the pryde of the Spaniard, yf he be any way
sought unto, how inderectly soever. I doe not beleave it, nether
wyll I speake of yt, but to tell your lordship of yt, to know yf
ye have hard any such thing."
   I told him, uppon my truth, no, (no more dyd I in dede) nor I
could not beleave yt whosoever shuld wryte yt, bycause I knew
hir majesty had meanes inowe offred hir to have herkened to a
peace or this, yf she had lysted; and he and the rest here might
assure themselves she wyll never deall or herken to peace but
their parte wylbe in yt as well as for hirself. "Seurly," sayth
he, "I wyll beleave so, for hir majesty hath bounde us by treaty
and contract that we shall no waye speake of peace without her
pryvytye fyrst, which, God wylling, wylbe truly observed. For
now ys yt in her majesties power both to save us, next unto God,
or to undoe us for ever." I dyd all I could to putt any such
conceatt out of hys head, for I wold be as loth to have yt in
myne owen, knowing how utterly hit wold both overthrow hir
majesty and thes countreys also; and how easily hir highnes ys
like at all tymes, whansoever she wyll, to have a peace at that
kinges hand. Nevertheless I could not be quyett but to advertyse
you hereof, trusting that ther wylbe no such matter in hand but
you wyll gyve your frend som knoledge wherby to govern himself
the better, and I wold be sorry my credytt werr so yll, seing I
dyd putt hir majesty in a better hope, and wyll perform yt, when
any good cause shalbe, than by such a meane to bring hir to a
peace. And so
<P 139>
having donn all my arrand for this tyme, I wyll byd you farewell
this xxvj. of February.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   Yf Pallavasyn come not, Gyttery wyll home to his master, and
com into England as he goeth, and so to his master. He wyll not
into Germany. He ys wonderfully greved, but I satysfie him all I
can, with the lacke of wynd to com out of England.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my very honorable good frend sir Francis
Walsingham, knight, principall secretary [\to\] her majesty.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 139>
[} [\LETTER XLIX. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 27TH FEBRUARY 1585-6.\] }]
   This day, being the xxvij. of February, having wrytten
yesterday another letter unto you, I have received intelligence
from Gelderland. Coronell Shenkes hath ageyn donn a notable pece
of servyce. He hath taken a towen and castle of great importance
for impeching the enemye in those partes, a place we have bynn
busye about this good while to gett, and now by his dyllygence
and dyscrete handling brought to effect. Hit ys a town in
Westfalia,
<P 140>
the principall town of all that provynce, called Werle,
belonging to the byshop of Colloyn, but in the enymyes handes,
and dyd us here great dyspleasure. This good fortune, God be
thankyd, ys now com to us.
   Beside, the count de Meurs hath donn a notable pece of
servyce very lately uppon a lettre I wrote unto him, beinge
discovered unto me from a man of Deventer that was one of their
councell and of the religyon, a place of mervellous importance
to this state, who opened a full conspyracye of certen
magystrates of that town to delyver yt upp to the enymye, and
had sworne a company among themselves for the purpose. The
honest mans letter I sent to the count, who presently without
delaye repayred thether, at whose coming they wold not lett him
entre but with vj persons, for indede they wold never yet
receive garyson into the towen, albeyt they held for this state
always, and beside they had comytted the party that wrote to me
to pryson before the countes coming, for that he semed to refuse
to joyn with the rest, being one of the chefe of the towen, in
this conspyracye. And the count hath so well behaved himself, as
he hath overthrowen all this practyce, and hath changed all the
magystrates, to the great lykyng of all the towen and the full
assurance of the same as at any tyme before, which, God wylling,
shall [\be\] better assured or long, uppon this occasion. I
trust ye shall hear of other manner of places taken or long.
   Myself had byn at Utrycht or now, but expecting styll hir
majesties pleasure from England, which tyll this day I hear
nothing; and yt ys most requysytt that I repayr into those
partes about Utrycht, for, tyll the houer of hir majesties
pleasure knowen, I wyll not neglect the servyce of this aflycted
countrey, which God, I trust, wyll prosper, yf not by me, yet by
som other that hir majesty shall apoint more fytt. For very
fezeable yt ys at this present, yf God putt into hir majesties
hart to procede in geving hir good countenance to them. I dare
undertake this v yeres they werr not in so good towardnes of
well doing as synce they tasted
<P 141>
of her majestys good favour, which God Almighty styll contynew
her in toward them.
   I am thretned to be used as the prince of Orang was, but I am
at a point for that, and yet, yf yt be founde that hir majesty
wyll go thorow with all how many soever shalbe so delt withall,
they wyll leave those practyces. I besech you procure a gracious
lettre, first to the count de Meurs, and next to coronell
Shenkes, who hath notably deservyd synce my coming; he hath now
donn iij exployttes uppon the enymye synce I cam to the Hagu,
and he desyers nothing more than to have her majestye know his
good hart toward hir. The count de Meurs, whome som call
Newener, ys lykwyse very greatly affected to hir majesty, and he
ys the best protestant that I here of in all these partes, and
doth most earnestly deall in causes of relygyon. And those at
Utrycht begynne excedingly to encreace in relygyon, who werr
lately the worst of all these provinces. Even synce my coming
they have shewed great frutes of yt; and so hath some other
places, also, that lyved newtraly before. The mynesters begynn
to be bolder than then they durst be before hir majesties
authoryty was here, for fewe did care for relygyon in dede, and
they have prospered accordingly, but only the meaner sort, and
God be thanked they be manny, and the work of God doth appeare
in them, by ther trade of lyfe from all others. The mynysters be
not many lernyd, but those that be ar very honest and dylligent,
and I am perswaded, within vj months, you shuld heare that these
provynces wylbe equall with any countrey for religyon, they doe
so dayly encreace.
   Thus, for this tyme, meaning to goe to morrow toward
Amsterdam and so to Utrycht, I wyll byd you farewell; in much
hast, trusting shortly to send you more as good newes as this.
At the Hag, this xxvij. of February.
   Your most assured,
   R. Leycester.
   I pray you bear with my scrybling; this berer can informe ye
of
<P 142>
all our state here. I wold hir majesty had many such, and so
able men, and of lyke good wyll. 
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my very good frend sir
Francis Walsingham, knight, principall secretary to her majesty.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 145>
[} [\LETTER LI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO THE LORDS OF THE
COUNCIL. 1ST MARCH 1585-6.\] }]
   My very good lords, I remember, a while ere my cominge over,
upon certayne requestes and articles delivered over to the
councell-boarde by the governor of the marchaunts-adventurers
for enlargment in some respect of theire priviledges, theire
booke was committed to the view of her majesties solliciter and
attorney, whose aunswere and advice thereupon had, fyndinge the
sute reasonable and allowable, I movyd her majestie, in the
marchauntes behalfe, in hope to have obteyned that desyred; but,
ere her highnes pleasure knowne thereof, I departed thince
towards these contries, leavinge yt unresolved. Now, forsomuch
as the marchaunts of Myddleborowe have made earnest sute unto
me, declaringe how diverslye there trade is hyndered, and they
endomaged,
<P 146>
by thindirect and coullorable dealings of interlopers and
disorderlye bretheren of theire societie, contrary to the trewe
meaninge and construction of the priviledges by her majesties
charter geven them; which they could not remedye, unlesse by the
favor of her majestie they might be assisted to bare a hande and
hynder sutch disorderous courses; consideringe theire demaund
founded on reason, and knowinge the sarvice duringe theire
beinge a corporation doun to their prince and contrie, also
theire willing readines to continew in the lyke, thought good to
recomend theire cause unto your lordships, most earnestlie
desyringe [\you\] to be so favorable unto them as to deale so
effectuallye with her majestie that theire longinge and wished
desyre may take effect, and your lordshipps shall not only, in
my opinion, do a good deed, but also bynd them to do their
indebvor by all meanes to be most readye allwayes at
commaundment. Wherwith, expecting some good aunswere from you, I
ende, and comytt your lordships to the tuition of thalmightie.
From Harlem, this first March, 1586.
   Your lordshippes to commaunde,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the moste honorable my very good lordes the
lordes of her majesties most honorable privy councell.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 147>
[} [\LETTER LII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 1ST MARCH 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretarye, I wryte presentlye to my lords of her
majesties counsell, in the behalfe and for the furderinge of the
marchaunt-adventurers sute, touchinge the inlargment of theire
priviledges. The cause is to you sufficientlie knowne, and of
yourself recommended, for the good-will you bare them, and yett,
thinkinge that my commendation may stand them in some steed unto
you, I was willinge, at theire sute, by a fewe written lynes to
desyre, that, the rather at this my request, you will stand
theire honorable freend in preferringe theire booke and
petition, and speake so effectually with fytt oportunitie, that
her highnes graunt may the sooner passe. And, besydes the good
which you shall doe unto them, which I am sure they will
indebvor themselves by sarvice to desarve, I shall also take yt
very freendlye, and wilbe as willinge to pleasure any at your
desyre in the lyke or otherwyse. Wherewith I ende, and commytt
your honour to the tuition of the Almightie. From Harlem this
first March, 1586.
   Your lovinge assuryd freend,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my honorable freend sir Frauncys Walsingham,
knight, her majesties chief secretarye.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 148>
[} [\LETTER LIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 3RD MARCH, 1585-6.\] }]
   I have received intelligence this day, from a very honest man
that hath remayned in Bruges tyll now he ys retyred to
Myddelborow, that ther ys a man, called Hyman, somtyme pencyonar
of Bruges, and was the dealer for the Fleminges in London v or
vj yeres agoe. Thys Hyman ys now sent by the prince of Parma,
into England, to some servyce of his, and hath undertaken
somwhat. He was once an offycer of the councell of state here
among them, and did than great servyce for the king of Spain,
for which he ys much esteemed. And this man that hath dyscovered
this ys one that redd with his eyes the offer this Heman made to
the prince for his servyce in England, and therin used wordes
which did shew that matters of great secresye had passed from
him when he was in England. You shall do well to enquire for
him, and yf he be ther, you may be bold to clapp him upp. I
understand credybly, that the Prince fedes himself in great
jolytye that hir majesty doth rather myslyke than allowe of our
doinges here, which, yf yt be trewe, lett hir be sure hir own
suete self shall first smart, and, as I hear, he doth now
provyde accordingly. Fare you well, in all hast, at Harlem, this
3. of March.
   Your assured,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my honourable good frend sir Francis
Walsingham, knight, her majesties principall secretarie.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 152>
[} [\LETTER LVI. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 6TH
MARCH, 1585-6.\] }]
   My very good lord, I shuld be ashamed greatly for not oftenar
wrytyng to your lordship of late, having receaved so manny from
yow, but that I have an excuse more sufficient than I lyke of,
which also this beror can inform yow of.
   Since Mr. Hennadg was sent from hence, who tarryed very long
at the sea-cost, for want of convenient wynd, hir majesty wold
never be content to have to any speeche of the state of thinges
nedefull to be knowen for your chardg. I have not desisted to
move hir to gyve eare, but she contynued hir offence as in no
sort I cold attayn to any answer mete to be given to your
lordship. And now of late having had a myshap by a fall, wherby
I have bene and still am to kepe my bed, I have at sondry tymes
wrytten to hir majesty. I have also sent my mynd by Mr.
vice-chamberlen, who hath ernestly vsed my name to hir majesty,
specially to send monny and men to supply the broken bandes, but
no answer to purpooss can be had, and yet I mynd not so to cess,
but, being pushed thereto with conscience and with care of hir
honor, yea, of her savety, I will still sollicit hir majesty,
hopyng that God will move hir to harken to necessary motions,
pryncipally for hirself.
<P 153>
   Now, my good lord, though I can gyve yow no answer to many
thynges, for lack of her majesties good disposition, yet I will
remembre the matters conteaned in your lordships lettres, and
wryte somewhat therof, in another paper her included, with my
mans hand, because, in very truth, the payne of my broosed forad
dishableth my hand to wryte as I wold.
   My lord, I imparted to hir majesty the secret offer made to
yow for to yield to hir majesty the gayn of xxx or xl=m= pounds
by the yere, for the permission to coyne the ross-nobles ther,
but hir majesty wold not be tempted therwith; and suerly, my
lord, I marvell how such a gayn can be made therof, for though
for a reasonable porcion to be coyned there, at the first
uttrance the same might be uttred for great gayn, yet when ther
should be any plenty, the gredynes of them will be stayd, and
the trew vallewe wold be knowen, and the estymation would abate.
   It wold be knowen to what quantitie he wold monthely or
quarterly coyne, and if it should be taken in hand, and within a
few months quayle for want of uttrance, the matter wold be evil
spoken of, to erect up a coynadg in a forrayn country of our
currant monny; but if the gayne might be suer, the proffit wold
answer the speeche. As I may heare more from your lordship, so
will I procede herin.
   And so I tak my leave of your lordship, praying yow to take
in good part my devyding of my lettre, by wryting part with myn
own hand and part with my servantes.
   From the court at Greenwych, the 6=th= of March, 1585.
   Your lordships allways assured,
   W. Burghley.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 154>
[} [\LETTER LVII. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 6TH
MARCH 1585-6.\] }]
   An awnsweare of divers matters mentioned in sondrie lettres
of the erle of Leicesters.
Lettres sent by Mr. Davison, 1=o= Feb.
   I have informed hir majestie, that his lordship is assured
that theire maye be shippes and mariners enough to be hired to
serve hir majestie uppon reasonable warning, whearein is
required to be understood, what nombres of shipps of warre may
be had to joine in consort with hir majesties shippes uppon the
seas, and wheather it be not ment the same shall be at the charg
of the states, otherwise hir majesty hath noe meaning to
increase hir charge; and though, at the first, it was thowght
meete, for supplie of our lacke of mariners, to hire sum from
thence for the navie of Englande, yet nowe, my lord-admirall and
the officers doe resolutelie awnsweare, theie will never have
anie mariners, being strangers, to be matched with the Englishe.
As for the request that M=r=. Davison might retorne, I find noe
likelood to geve your lordship anye hope thereof.
<P 155>
   The awditor Hunt hath shewed a forme of an accompt of the
treasurer for the expence of the treasure delivered to him,
which commeth to lij=m li=, with v=m li= delivered to M=r=. John
Norris at the beginning. In this accompt theare [\are\] sondrie
thinges dowbtfull, spetiall for manie paimentes made by the
treasurer withowt anie warrant either from M=r=. Norris or from
your lordship. Theare is, also, noe good reckoning made by the
treasurer of the v=m li= first delivered to M=r=. Norris, whie
the same is not repaid by the states; neither of such monie as
he hath laide owt for the pioners serving the states; other
particular dowbtes theare be whereof M=r=. secretarie hath made
a colleccion, which shall be, either by Hunt the awditor or sum
other, sent over thither to be awnsweared; but that which I waie
more of than all this is, that I find certainelie, uppon the
vewe of this accompt, that the treasurer had not sufficient for
a monethes paie before the end of Januarie, so as he lacketh
both for Februarie and for this present moneth of Marche, for
which purpose it is more than good time the treasure weare on
the waie thither.
   I have informed hir majestie of the 200,000 florins accorded
to be monethlie paid by the states, to be clearelie expended,
besides discharge of their former debtes, and the charges of the
sea; thes thinges weare mentioned in the former lettre.

Lettres of 2. February.
   A matter concerning coinage shall be awnswered in a lettre of
mine owne handes, yet your lordship shall understand what
bargaine hath been made heare before the threasurers departure,
with him and alderman Martin, that is, that hir majesty should
be awnsweared for the coinage of everie pownd, vizt. of gold in
rozenobles, the summ of xxx=s=, wheare before theare ware paid
for the coinage but vj=s=. so as nowe the encrease is
xxiiij=s=., which by reckoning cometh in tale to x=d=. for every
xx=s=., that before was but ij=d=.; thus much for matters of the
second lettre.
<P 156>
Lettres of the 3d. February.
   Concerninge the levienge and sending of 1000 pioners, of
[{whom{] one hundred to be miners, bicause I thinke it weare
verie necessarie for your service theare, I have furthered it
the best of my power, but howe it proceadeth your lordship shall
understand from M=r=. secretarye.
   That which your lordship writeth of the comte of Embdens
affection to Spaigne I am sorie to thinke it to trewe, although
since your lordships departure from hence the comte sent
spetiall lettres to hir majestie, with grevous complaintes
against the Hollanders by spoilinge of his people with their
shippes in the river of Emps, requiringe hir majestie to write
hir lettres to the states in Holland to reforme the abuses of
their shippes and men of warre, with an offer to showe his good
will to the cawse which hir majestie had taken in hand for them,
and, for this purpose, hir majestie wrote hir lettres unto him
of cumfort to procure the redresse, and lettres to them of
Holland to performe the same; at which time, also, theare weare
lettres written to your lordship to [{take{] sum meanes to
compound the same controversie betwixt them, [{all{] which
lettres as I thinke Ortellius had to send into Holland; what was
done thearebie I knowe not, but yet, within a few daies, Ortell
reported, that all thinges weare well compounded betwixt [{the
states{] of Holland and the comte, and so I thought thei had
been, untill nowe that I doe otherwise understand from your
lordship, as likewise sir Thomas Shurlee reporteth the same.

Lettres of 12. February.
   I find that our merchant-men doe greatlie misuse themselves
in enhaunsing up the prices of armour theare, and, according to
your advise, I wishe the provision that is to be made for hir
majestie might be made from thence with your assistaunce.
   Your lordship writeth to have one Seburo, a Spaniard that is
a presonar heare, to be delivered in exchange for the sonne of
the bailif
<P 157>
of Dort, whearein what to awnsweare your lordship at this time I
knowe not, for that theare hath been great motion made to
procure for him the deliverie of Stephen le Sire, which I thinke
M=r=. secretarie hath furthered. And if he might free them both
[{it{] weare noe ill bargaine for England, for that Seburo is a
man of small valeue to do either good or hurt, onelie his
kin[{sman{] the governour of Dunkirke doth desire him for
frendshipp.

Lettres of 15. February.
   Your lordship moveth to have our merchantes to trade into
Holland with theare cloathes, and also with theire woolles,
which thing hath been moved unto them heretofore, and theie of
the staple for wooll have alledged, that theie have noe hope to
have anie great vent for theire woolle, considering theie have
had good quantetye of theire woolles lieng long at
Middleborough, for the which, theie saie, thei never could have
vent but to their great losse: and I moved them to change their
staple to Brill, according to the request of the towne of Brill
sent hither the last sommer by M=r=. Davison, but I could not at
that time induce them to loke thereof. Nevertheles, I will
assaie them nowe uppon your lordships newe motion, with the
offer of the Hollanders that theie will leave draping of the
Spanish woolles and occupiours, whearebie I thinke, in truthe,
our woolle maie have good utterance. For the
merchaunte-adventurers, I will also deale with them for theire
trade thither, with theire cloathes, considering neither
Hamborough nor Embden are fitt places for them as the worlde
shapeth, but I feare the greatest lett will be, that theire will
be noe safe passag for theire cloathes to be carried upp into
Germanie by the river of the Rhein, speteallie considering the
towne of Newmeggen is in the enemies hand, and the convoies of
such against the streame will be subject to dangers in divers
places, being waited for by the enemie: but if our merchantes
could be content to keape theire martes in thes Lowe Countries,
withowt seeking to conveie them upp into Germanie themselves, it
is likelie that both
<P 158>
Italians and Germaines would com into thos cuntries and buie
them at the first hand themselves, and by meanes of safe
conductes would make theire passages free. By this your lettre,
also, your lordship doth confirme your opinion of the comte
Embden to be Spanishe.

Lettre of the 18. of February.
   I was glad to perceive that your lordship hath obtained a
grawnt of 100,000 florins more for fowre monethes, and yet I am
gladde to understand, by report of sir Thomas Shurleie, that yt
should be 200,000, so as then your lordship shall have by the
moneth xl=m li=. sterling, which surelie is a great yeld, and an
argument of the liking of your government. I am glad, also, that
you have obtained the erecting of the howse of finances,
whearein I dowbt not but you have men of sufficient conning for
the guiding thereof: but I feare theire subteltie, for theire be
noe people can better skill to make a gaine of coinage than thos
Lowe Countriemen.
   In that your lordship is so desirous to have sir William
Pelham theare, I thinke you have great reason, for, in truthe, I
knowe noe one man borne in England of more sufficiencie than he
is, but the lett of his not comming I thinke this bearer can
fullie informe yowe, which, for my part, I have sowght to
remedie in all that I can, as well for the releef of the
gentleman himself, as for the proffit of the service that might
growe by his being with you.
   I am glad that yowe have the use of my brother Killegrewe,
who, as he is of great experience, so I knowe he doth of verie,
meere affection towardes your lordship serve theare at this
time, which otherwise noe reward could provoke him, such desire
I knowe he hath to live privatelie and unoccupied.
[^THE REST OF THE LETTER AUTOGRAPH^]
   My good lord, in this sort hytherto have I eased myn own hand
to releve my evill forhed. And now, since sir Thomas Shyrleys
<P 159>
coming, which was on Fryday at night, I must leave to hym to
send yow report of his actions. Hopyng, that, within some few
dayes, he shall have more matter to wryte of than that he hath.
And so I end at this tyme, overcom with feare of sham that I may
have to wryte but on lettre, to so manny as I have receaved from
your lordship, and manny of them of your hand: but the fault is
not lack of good will to wryte oftenar, if oftenar I might have
a subject of matter. I dout not but by M=r=. secretory your
lordship doth understand of the proceadynges both forward and
syde-wey in Scotland, of which variete truly the cheff cause
cometh from hence. God amend it, whan it shall please hym to
thynk us worthy of better. From the court at Grenwych the 6. of
March, 1585.
   Your lordships assuredly, as anye,
   W. Burghley.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 162>
[} [\LETTER LIX. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO THE LORDS OF THE
COUNCIL. 9TH MARCH, 1585-6.\] }]
   My verye singuler good lords, I am to render most hartye and
humble thankes unto you, for that, I am informyd, hit hath
pleaside you to be meanes to hir most excellent majesty, to
quallyfye hir hard conceatt agenst my pore servyce donne here.
   I wyll not excuse myself of a great fault, that I dyd not
first aquaint her highness before I dyd accept this office, and
to receave hir good pleasure therin, but what I may alleage for
myself I trust Mr. Davison hath delyvered, or elles hath he
greatly both deceaved me and broken promys with me. How ernest I
was, not only to aquaint hir majesty, but, imedyatly, uppon the
first mocion made here by the states, to send him over to hir
majesty with my letters and his report of the whole state of
these matters, I dowbt not but he wyll truly affyrme for me,
yea, and how farr ageinst my wyll it was, notwithstanding any
reasons delyvered me, that he and others persisted in, to have
me accept first of this place. Albeyt, I must confes, all that
he dyd, presuming the exstremytye of the cace to be such as he
thought himself fully hable to satysfie hir majesty, as a matter
either than to be taken without all delaye or to fall utterlye
to the ground, and his knowledge therof I know to be farr beyond
myne, having byn contynewally
<P 163>
beaten here among them, long before my coming, and most carefull
was he to bring all to the best pass for hir servyce. Uppon
which exstremytye of the cace, as yt was, and being perswaded
that Mr. Davyson might better have satysfyed hir majestie than I
perceave he can, caused me, nether arrogantly nor
contemptuouslye, but even merely and faythfully, to doe hir
majesty the best servyce. And as I say not thys to worke any
blame to Mr. Davyson, whose most sincere honest minde toward hir
servyce I must acknowledge, so yet may I not leave so greatt a
conceatt remayne in hir majestyes minde of my undewtyfullnes,
whan I did not only remember my dewty as I have told you, but
dyd urge the performance therof as I have wrytten. But my
yelding was my none fault, whatsoever his perswasions, or any
others, might be, seing the reasons be no more acceptyd of hir
majesty than they be; but farr from a contemptuous hart, or
elles God pluck out both hart and bowelles, with utter shame.
   And finding hit thus hardly to light uppon me, which I
thought should have wonne a more favorable constructyon, the
doing having wholye tended to the advauncement of hir majesties
most honorable servyce, as all men here hath and doth see, I doe
most humbly besech your good lordships, to contynew your good
favors towards me, and to wey whereuppon hir majesties offence
hath groen, only uppon presuming to much of hir good opinion of
my fidellytye toward hir, and partly by Mr. Davisons over-great
slacknes to have answered soner and better for me, as he
promysed he wold. And being greatly dyscouraged, albeyt I could
allege for the cause and place very much to satysfie your
lordships for my honest servyce therby to hir majesty, yet wyll
I not seme to travell ageinst the groundes of hir majestyes so
depe conceatt, but leave yt to God and your lordships most
frendly medyation to conceave, that I am hir most loyall
faythfull bondman, and had never ether contemptuous or unworthy
thought of hir sacred majesty, but as becam so bounded a servant
and subject as I am, and
<P 164>
ever wylbe to hir, lett hir use me as shall please hir. And, yf
withowt offence and with hir favour, hit ys not only the leaving
of this place I shall humbly desier, but to serve hir majesty
where elles soever by my humble and dayly prayer, which shall
never ceas for hir most happie preservacion and long
contynewance, finding myself very unfytt and unable to wade in
so weighty a cause as this ys, which ought to have much more
comfort than I shall ether find or desarve. Thus, beseching God
to bless and govern all your councelles to his glorye and hir
majestyes best servyce, I humbly take my leave. At Harlem this
ix. of March, 1586.
   Your lordships most assured pore frend,
   R. Leycester.
   As far as I can perceave, hir majesty doth think, that by
this place I tooke I have engaged hir in some further sort than
she was before, but your lordships shall find, I did both forsee
that, and ther ys no such cause to think yt; for yt ys most
certen, ther ys no more donn on hir majestyes parte than hir
owne contract doth bynd hir, only she hath hir own servant to
comaund here, whear some one other must, which wold, I think,
more have myslyked hir.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honourable my very good lords, the
lords of her majesties moste honourable privye counsaile.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 165>
[} [\LETTER LX. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 9TH MARCH, 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretary, I thank you for your letters, though you can
send me no comfort; I trust God wyll not leave those that meane
truly, and trust in him. Hir majesty doth deall hardly to
beleave so yll of me. Hyt is true that I faulted, bycause I dyd
not advertyse hir majesty first or I shuld take such an
authorytye uppon me, but she doth not consider what comodyttyes
she hath withall, and hirself no way engaged for yt, either one
way or other, as Mr. Davison myght have better declaryd yt, yf
yt had pleasd him. And I must thank him only for my blame, and
so he wyll confess to you, for, I protest before God, no
necessyty here could have made me leave hir majesty unacquantyd
with the cause before I wold have acceptyd of yt, but only his
so ernest pressing me, with his faythfull assured promys to
dischardge me, howsoever hir majesty shuld take yt. For you all
se ther, she had no other cause to be offended but this, and, by
the Lord, he was the only cause, albeyt yt ys no suffycyent
allegacion, being as I am.
   And as for the importance of the cause I did adventure, so
considering the importance of hindering the cause thorow the
dyspleasure that doth fall uppon me, hit had byn an honest part
yet to have lett hir majesty know how ernest I was, and how
resolute,
<P 166>
to acquaint hir with the cause or I would have taken the place;
and hit could not have had any blame almost, doing yt, as he did
indeede, for hir great servyce, and assuredly all had byn lost
yf I had not than acceptyd of yt as I dyd, and, accepting yt as
I dyd, with my former resolucyon and myndfullnes to advertyse
hir, he had, I think, saved all to have told hir, as he promysed
me. But now yt ys leyd uppon me, God send the cause to take no
harm, my grefe must be the less; though yt toucheth me as nere
as doth hir majesties so hard dyspleasure, yet have I no way, I
thank God, tyed hir majesty to any inconvenyence by my
acceptance. How farr Mr. Henneages comyssion shall deface me
here I know not; he ys wary to observe hys comyssyon, and I
content withall. I know the tyme wylbe hir majesty wyll be sorry
for yt. In the meane tyme I am to to wery of the high dygnyty, I
wold any that could serve hir majesty werr placed in yt and I to
sytt down with all my losses.
   I assure you, uppon my fidelity, I have spent and leyd out
for hir majesty's servyce above 11,000=li= sterling alredy, in
these iij months. I thought yt wold have served me v months
longer here. I tell you truly my howse alone hath cost me a
1000=li= a month, and some month more. I have also payd hetherto
v=c= and l. men; of my owne purse these, and furnyshed them of
my none chardges. And for the horsmen, I am sure all these
countreys enymyes, or other, have not such vj=c=. horse as I
have. I receavyd but for iiij=c=. as you know, and I have payd,
both for the other ij=c=. and, synce I cam hether, a c. and l.
more; so that I have above iij=c=. and l. that myself hath
raysed, above the iiij=c=. hir majesty payd for at London. And
all this ys lyke to light uppon me, instead of better happ. I am
sure ther hath not a gentleman past hence, ether of my none or
otherwyse, but the least hath had x=li=. some xx=li=., some
xxx=li=., and the most xx. Well, so I might have gott any more
money for my land that ys left, I wold as well have spent more,
for ther be many here have spent much.
   But, sir, whatsoever become of me, gyve me leave to speake
for
<P 167>
the pore soldyeres. Yf they be not better mainteyned, being in
this strang countrey, ther wyll nether be good service donn, nor
be without great dishonour to hir majesty, and the less she
shall send at once the more unproffytable for hir, and she shall
find yt so, and xx=m li=. to send now, I doe assure you yt ys
all dew alredy, and you se what lettes you have by the wynd.
Ther was no soldyer yet able to buy himselfe a pair of hose, and
yt ys to to great shame to se how they goe, and hit kills ther
hartes to shew themselves among men. Well, you se the wantes,
and hit ys one cause that wyll gladde me to be rydd of this hevy
high cauling, and wyshe me at my pore cottage ageyn, yf any I
shall find. But, lett hir majesty pay them well, and apoint such
a man as sir William Pellam to govern them, and she never wann
more honour than these men here wyll doe, I am perswaded.
   For newes, I wrote you of late that Shenkes had taken a town
and castle in Westfalia called Werl. Synce that, the enymyes of
that countrey gathered together, both the gentlemen and ablest
men, and offred a kind of siege of the towne, but Shenkes
issewed out and sett uppon them, slewe that [\there\] ley ded in
the fild 2500 persons; he toke a great nomber prisoners, among
which wer 25 of very good cauling, and the ij chife captens
beside. Surely this ys a noble fellow, having done this he fecht
in all ther vyttells, and vytteled the towen and castell, and
left a good garison, and putt himself now safe into Nuse, which
we doubtyd to be besiged shortly. Ostend ys thought wylbe
beseged, but I fear yt not.
   Thus, having spent my paper and all my news, I betake you to
God, &c. At Harlem 9. March.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my honorable good frend sir Francis
Walsingham, knight, principall secretary to her majesty.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 177>
[} [\LETTER LXIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 17TH MARCH 1585-6.\] }]
   Mr. secretorye, touching Pointes, of whome you wryte, I am
sory he is sent any other waye. I delivered him an hundred
poundes, and he promised me to have gone into the enemyes campe.
And so, with my harty commendacions, fare you well. From
Amsterdame the xvij. of Marche.
   Your very loving frende,
   R. Leycester.
[^POSTSCRIPT AUTOGRAPH^]
   I am forst to use a secretary, but yet, perhapps, you wyll
not very plainly understand whome I meane; hit ys Anto. Poyntz,
whome I sent over to gyve you knoledge how I had imployed him to
the enymyes camp, a matter of most nede for me, and I mervelled
that I never hard from [{him,{] and within these iiij. days, my
nephew Phillip told me he received a letter from him that you
had sent him into Spayn, whereof I am hartyly sorry, having
greatly dysapointyd me, having not one to suply that place nowe,
and a great tyme lost, also, that you dyd not at the first gyve
me knoledge of yt.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my honourable good frende Mr. secretory
Walsingham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 178>
[} [\LETTER LXIV. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 20TH MARCH 1585-6.\] }]
   My verry good lord, theire is [{all con{]venient speed used
in the prepa[{ration{] and putting in a ready[{ness{] the money
resolved on by her majestye to bee sent over, which I am sorrye
fawleth not owt in proportyon large as the necessytie of the
servyce requirethe, so that your lordship, contrarye to your own
lyking, shall be forced to stand uppon a defencyve warre: yt
wyll be verry discompfortable to the people of thos contryes,
espetyally when they shall see there townes lost, which your
lordship for lacke of hennowghe assistance, shall not be able to
prevent.
   Suche gentlemen as your lordship appoynted to levye men ar
tyred with long attendaunce here, for that her majestye cannot
be drawn to resolve therin. Her awnswer is, that shee wyll see
an accompt of thos allreadye sent over, before she yeld her
assent to the sending over of any more, I shewed un[\to\] her
highness the hard estate the towne of Grave stands in, which
coold not be releeved withowt an encrease of forces, which moved
your lordship to presse my lords of the cownsell here to take
some care for the speedye dyspatche of the gentlemen. I dyd also
shew unto her, that the losse of that towne woold woorke some
changing in the peoples hartes, when they shoold see themselves
subject
<P 179>
to lyke misfortune as they were before her majestye tooke uppon
her to protect them. But nothing that can be alleaged can drawe
her majestye to yeld to any thing that tendeth to the
furtheraunce of the servyce there, otherwyse then led by mere
necessytye.
   I fynde her dysposed to lyke that certeyn cashed bandes in
Ierland, uppon dowbt that otherwyse they wyll put her to some
charge here, shall be transported into the Lowe Countreys, so yt
may be don withowt her burden. I have caused Mr. Davison [\to\]
sette downe with what charge the same may be performed, which I
wyll send unto your lordship.
   Seing her majestye is no better dysposed to send over her
owne subiectes, I thinke your lordship, in case you resolve to
contynewe your servyce there, shall doe well to take part of the
master of Grayes offer, whoe, as my cosyn Randollph sendethe me
woord, sendethe an expresse gentleman unto your lordship to
knowe your lordships resolutyon therin. I fynde the gentlemen
that your lordship hath appoynted to make the levye are lothe to
take upon them that charge with the allowance of xx=s=. the man,
and herof your lordship shall doe well, in case her majestie may
be drawen to assent that any levyes shall be made here, to move
the states to increase the somme.
   By the inclosed copy of sir Edward Staffordes letter your
lordship shall see, howe resolutely the king ther is bent to
prosecute the warre, with the uttermost of his power, agaynst
thos of the relygyon.
   Ther hath ben certeyn offers made unto her majestye, and by
her rejected, and yet of no great charge, that carryed great
probabylytie
<P 180>
to have withstoode both Godes and her enemyes. I praye God, the
lacke of fealing and compassion of others myseryes, doe not
drawe uppon us hys heavye hande; to whos protection I commyt
your lordship, most humbly takyng my leave. At the coorte, 20.
Marche, 1585.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra. Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 184>
[} [\LETTER LXVI. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 21ST MARCH, 1585-6.\] }]
   My very good lord, thincloased hath of late [{been{] written
unto me by the duke of Nevers, conteyning a r[{equest{] , as
your lordship may perceave by the same, that, by my means, the
subjectes of his dutchy may obteyne licence to be served of
salte for their owne necessarye use out of the countryes of
Holland and Zelland, with sufficient ca[{ution{] that the sayd
salte shall by no meanes come into the [{hands{] of thenemy. The
nobleman is one to whom I [{was{] greatly behoulding in the tyme
of my imployement [{in{] Fraunce, for the which I would be glad
to shew [{my{] self thanckfull towardes him with any service I
[{can{] do him, which moveth me earnestly to pray your lordship,
that, uppon consideracion of the said request, and communicating
of the same to the states, yt may please you to returne an
aunswer unto me, whether yt [{can{] be graunted or no, to thend
I may accordinglye satisfye the duke, according to his
expectacion and myne owne promise. And so I humbly take my
leave. At Grenwich the xxj=th= of March.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra. Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 185>
[} [\LETTER LXVII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 21ST MARCH, 1585-6.\] }]
   My very good lord, there are einowe here who [{having{]
knowledg that hir majesty is intent that there shalbe a [{levy{]
made in Ireland for the states, have offered ther services
[{to{] take that chardg uppon them, nevertheless understanding
[{from{] sir Thomas Shirley that your lordship meant the sayd
chardg unto sir [{William{] Stanley, I have theruppon geven all
others their answer. And, because your lordship, as I suppose,
cannot well spare sir William Stanley himself from thence, to
come and make the sayd leavye [{in{] Ireland, I have thought
good to move you in the behalfe of Mr. Dautry, who offireth his
service in that imployement. He may, withall, have the chardg of
lieutenant-coronell [{for sir{] William Stanley of thes Irish
troopes. The gentleman [{is{] one that loveth sir William
Stanley well, who I heare [{doth{] also make verye good accompt
of him. I have conferred with him about the chardges of the
leavy, his demaund is [{three{] pound a man, and myn offer but
fifty shillinges, he sayeth, [{that{] part therof may be
defalked out of their enterteynment, [{and{] he telleth me, that
two thousand maie well be had out [{of the{] countrie where he
is to make the leavy, by meanes of [{sir{] Henry Harringtons
credit, who is hable to make up [{two{] thowsand.
<P 186>
Yt may please your lordship to returne aunswer of [{the{] states
disposicion, whether they can be content to be servid with
[{that{] country people, and how many they are willing to
enterteyne; [{and{] what chardges they shall yeld to allowe for
the leavyeng of them.
   The master of Gray hath lately sent one captain Tiry hether,
[{to{] sollicit your lordships aunswer to thoffer he hath
hertofor made to [{find{] fower or fyve thowsand Scottes to the
service of the states under your lordship, with direction ether
to stay here or to passe [{over to{] your lordship for this
purpose, as I should advise him. And, for I am uncerten how your
lordship may be resolvid touching your continuance or
discontinuance in that service, uppon occasion of the late
accident that hath fallen out, I have therfor directid the party
to stay untill I may heare from your lordship, wherof I pray
your lordship to [{be{] myndfull, for the better satisfaction of
the master. And so I now humbly take my leave. At Grenwich this
xxj=th= of March.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra. Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 186>
[} [\LETTER LXVIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 24TH MARCH, 1585-6.\] }]
   Your lordships of the 3. of this [{present{] sent by your
servant Wyllyam, I have receyved, by the [{which{] you desyre
<P 187>
that an eye be [{given{] unto Iman; yt may please your lordship
to understand, that Iman, abowt a two monthes past, was at
Callas, and sent over for a save-conduct, which being denied
unto him, he stayed his commyng into this realme.
   I doe daylye sollycyt her majesty for the lycensyng of sooche
gentlemen as were recommended by your lordship to make ther
levyes of [{such{] nombers as were by you appoynted, but she
delayethe her resolucyon therin untyll she heare from sir Thomas
Henneage, whos letteres are not yet come to this coort, thowghe,
as I understande, master Vavaser, to whom they were commytted,
was dyspatched from thence the 10=th= of this present. Mr.
Warde, whoe was dyspatched thence about that tyme, arryved the
xx=th=. He imbarked at the Brill, and Mr. Vavaser went to
Flusshing, wharby he lost the benefyt of the wynde.
   By letters of 17. of Marche owt of Scotlande, we heare, that
the king there dothe yelde all satysfactyon unto her majestyes
mynister, Mr. Randolphe, and contrarye measure unto the Frenche
kinges mynister, which he takethe in extreme yll parte. I wyll
send your lordship the coppie of soche letteres as we have
receavyd from Mr. Randolphe, whoe receyvethe at the kinges
handes far better usage then he looked for. I praye God this
opportunytye be not lost, as others before have ben. I fynde a
greater cowldenes then the state of the present time requyrethe.
   The Spanishe preparatyons, as they reporte that came from
Lysbon the x=th=. of this present, wyll prove nothing this
yeare, and I hope lesse the next, yf yt be trewe that is wrytten
also from the Spanishe coorte to an Englyshman in Andelesya. The
substaunce [{is\] , that sir Francis Drake hath 6000 Semironets
repayred unto him, whoe have chosen and crowned him king, and
that he hathe great store of them sure. I doe not desyre to be
awthor of thes news for that methinkes they are [{too{] good to
be trewe.
<P 188>
Somewhat I am induced to belyve them for that Don Antonio de Cas
[\...\] , late imbassator for the cardynall-king of Portugall,
hathe [{made{] , by letters dyrected unto my[{self{] , some
overture for a peace, wherein he desyrethe to be imployed, for
that he fyndeth the king of Spayne, as he saith, desyerowse
thereof. I [{would{] to God her majestye woold put on a good
cowntenaunce for only fowre monethes, and I dowbt not but Spayne
woold seake peace greatly to her majestyes honor and advantage.
But God for owre synnes sake wyll not suffer us to doe that
which myght owre most good. And so I most humbly take my leave.
At the coorte the 24=th=. of Marche, 1585.
   Your lordships to command,
   Fra. Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 188>
[} [\LETTER LXIX. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO THE LORDS OF THE
COUNCIL. 27TH MARCH, 1585-6.\] }]
   My verie good lords, althoughe I doe expect her majesties
good pleasure daily for my revocacion hence, yet will I not
waie,
<P 189>
in the meane time, neglect my duety to my service in the charge
committed by her highnes to me, nor leave your good lordships
unadvertised what hath past since my last letters, which as I
remember was from Harlem upon the arryvall of sir Thomas
Heneage, before whoes coming I had determined this journey to
Utrecht, and was onward so farre in my waie.
   And, for that sir Thomas Heneage would not proceed with any
resolucion here with the states touching his commission, till he
had received againe hir majesties pleasure, nor yet thought good
I should staie my journey, bycause it was of verie great
consequence, and the assembly of all our souldiers that maie be
spared owt of garrison, as well horse as foot, appointed here by
a certein daie, I did follow the former determinacion
accordingly, the rather being commaunded by her majestie to take
my direccion from sir Thomas Heneage, who in any wise wished me
to proceed on, till I should hear again from her majestie. So I
went to Amsterdam, and there remained iiij or v dayes, and from
thence hither to Utrecht, where I am taking order for the
present service now to be sett foorth, which is for the releef
of a town called Grave, a place of verie great importaunce. We
have other places to deale in like sort with, as also to doe
what I can to drawe thenemies forces owt of Brabant and Flanders
hitherward, which it is like they will, for the defense of such
fortes as they have left garded, and by which indeed they doe
besiege Grave, albeit they have layed no battry to it, for there
be five skonces that they built abowt it before I arryved here:
yet have I by stelth intelligence from thence, and, upon some
good oportunitie, have cawsed it to be both vitteiled and 300
men putt into it, notwithstanding their skonces: and now I hope
it shalbe fully releeved. I have sent the horsemen alredie
onward, being 1500, very strong. The footmen are also marching
to the randevous, and wilbe there too morrow night, all of them,
being dryven to separate them for a time, and, till the service
of Grave be past, our horsemen lie at a village called Nycark,
and our footmen at Amaron.
   Now am I most ernestly to recommend to your good lordships
<P 190>
the nedefull estate of the capteins and souldiers here. I have
ben driven to borrow for their relief and for this journey, to
helpe them, 4000=li=. of the merchantes of Middleburghe, and
what I have disbursed of mine own purse is not unknown here, I
thinke, to all men. I would the full estate of the disbursing of
her majesties treasure heretofore were certeinly knowne to your
lordships. I wishe it for sundrie respectes, but it will requier
a very skillfull man to examine it. Her majesty cannot loose by
it &c., and yt wold be a very good satysfactyon to me. And thus,
prainge to the almighty God to preserve all your good lordships,
do take my leave. At Utrycht, this 27. of March.
   Your good lordships always to comaunde,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honourable my verie good lords, the
lords of her majesties most honourable pryvie councell.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 190>
[} [\LETTER LXX. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 28TH MARCH, 1586.\] }]
<P 191>
   Your lordships of the ix=th= of [{this present{] and of the
xx=th=, the one sent [{by{] Mr. Vavisor, the other by [^NAME NOT
GIVEN^] , I have receyved.
   The choyce of Mr. Vavasor, [{who is{] a person very agreable
unto her majestye, hathe wrowght in [{her{] a better conceipt
towardes your lordship then any other sent from the[{nce{] .
Besydes, the gentleman hath performed the charge commytted unto
hym by your lordship in so goode sorte as owre stormes begin to
caulme, so as I hope I shall have cause to chaynge my style,
which heretofore hath ben verry dyscompfortable unto your
lordship. Her majestye hathe not yet read the letters browght by
Mr. Vavisor, being trobled with an exstreeme cowld and defluxion
into her eyes, so as she cannot indure to reade any thing.
   The treasure departs hence to morrowe, but no increase of the
somme, nor non doe I looke for, howesoever the stormes be
overblowen. Yf the inconvenience lykely to insue therbye be not
helped thorrowghe sir Francis Drakes good successe, which is a
matter accydentall, I feare your lordship shall receave very
scarce measure from hence, for you wyll not beleve how the
sparing humor doth increase uppon us.
   The audytor retornethe with the threasure, whoe is dyrected,
with sooche assystaunce as your lordship shall thinke meate to
yeld unto him, to examyn strycktly the imparfect items of the
threasorers accompt, who, yf he shall not yeld good
satysfactyon, as I thinke he can in no sorte performe, then is
yt meant that he shall no longer supplye the place.
   Ther are letters wrytten unto hym, that he shall make no
dysbursementes but as he shall be dyrected by your lordship,
and, yf he shall doe contrary wyse, he can no way be dyscharged,
for that withowt your lordships warrant he owght to make no
payement.
<P 192>
   Towching the governement of the Bryll, which your lordship
wyssheth unto the lord Northe, I fynde her [{majesty{] most
resolute that sir Thomas [{Cycell{] after the recoverye of his
[{health{] shall returne thither. I think she coold lyke better
of the removing of sir Philip Sydney [{towards{] whom she hathe
put on a very hard conceypt. The lord thresorer dothe
some[{what{] complayne that there hathe ben better contentement
yelded to other garrysons then that of [{the{] Bryll, which I
fynde he taketh unkyndely. Of late her majestye shewed me a
letter wrytten from sir Thomas Cycell, to as goode purpose in
defence of your lordships acceptinge of the governement as any
other I have seene wrytten by any thence.
   The opynion of my partyalytie conytnewethe noryshed by
factyon, which makethe me weerye of the place I serve in, and to
wysshe myself emongst the trewe harted Swy [^EDITOR HAS NOT
IDENTIFIED THE ABBREVIATED NAME^] . And so in hast I most humbly
take my leave. At the coorte this xxviij=th= of Marche, 1585.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra. Walsyngham.
   The inclosed towching Ryngowt cam from a person of good
credyt, and therfor your lordship shall doe well to have an eye
to his doinges.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 196>
[} [\LETTER LXXIII. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 31
MARCH 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, although of late many crossees or stormes
<P 197>
have happened to trooble your lordships mynd, to the hyndrance
of the commen utillite of the servyce of God and of hir majesty
in that countrye, yet sence your conscience doth testefy and
warrant your doynges to have bene ment for the furderance of the
weale therof, and the successes also, exceptyng the thwartes
from hence, do make good proffe that your actions do prosper, I
wish your lordship to contynew your disposition, and to comfort
yourself with your own integrite, which God will not have
oppressed, though he may exercise your patience, and prove the
fortitude of your mynd to contynew well-doyng and suffer
reprooff for a time. Thus much for a small preface, and now to
the matter.
   I dout not but this bearor shall come with some better
satisfaction, both for yourself and for the cause, than the
enemyes therof have looked for. Suerly unto Mr. Vavasor cam, we
here that ment well both to yourself and the cause found dayly
litle comfort, and yet suerly your frendes here did not omitt
any opportunite. But, uppon such conference as I had with hym,
of the doutfull state of that country, I, in presence of Mr.
secretory, used some boldnes with hir majesty, and protested to
hir as a counsellor, that for discharg both of my conscience and
of my oth of hir counsellor, I cold not forbeare to lett her
know, that this couers that she held ageynst your lordship was
lyk to endaunger hir in honor, suerty, and profitt; and that, if
she contynued the same, I prayed hir majesty that I might be
discharged of the place I held, and both afor God and man, be
fre from the shame and perill that I sawe cold not be avoided. I
used boldly such bold language in this matter as I found hir
dowtfull whyther to chardg me with presumption, which partly she
did, or with some astonishment of my round speche, which truly
was no other than my conscience did move me, even (\in
amaritudine animae\) . And then hir majesty began to be more
calm than befor, and, as I conceaved, redyar to quallefy hir
displesur and hir opinion. And so, finding sir Thomas Shyrley
redy to wryte, about three dayes past, I willed hym to advertise
your lordship, that I douted not
<P 198>
but that matters wold not contynew in that evill state wherin
they were; and so, as he can tell yow, he did wryte, but stayd
the sendyng therof on daye, in which tyme, to my great greff,
lookyng for some good resolution, I and Mr. secretory found hir
gon backward, as on that had bene by some adverse counsell
seduced, to thynk that all shuld do well in those countryes
though your lordship war displaced; and so he with greff stayd
his wrytyng.
   But yet, I did not thus leave the matter, and so, yesterday,
Mr. secretory and I aventured very boldly to declare our
censures of perill to come, which no councell nor action shuld
recover, and hereuppon, we obteyned a favorable answer, though
not to our full lykyng, but yet such as she commanded to put in
wrytyng, and so we war therin occupyed. And then, unlooked for,
cam a letter of your lordship to Mr. vice-chamberlen, wherewith
he made hir majesty acqueynted, and she told hym, that she had
declared hir resolution to Mr. secretory and me, and so willed
hym to come to my chamber, and so he did, and there we fyndyng
some new occasion to seek a better resolution of hir majesty, we
all three went to hir majesty, and there I told hir very
playnly, that I did see that if she used not spede to content
the states and the people of those countryes, she wold not only
lose them, but hir honor in the world, and she shuld fynd
certenly as gret daunger from those countryes, as she had looked
for comfort. Herewith she was greatly troobled, and so being
thereto moved, she assented to do any thyng that she might with
hir honour.
   In fyne, we moved hir to assent that your lordship shuld
contynew your office for some tyme, untill the state of the
matter might be better consydered by hir, and so letters were
appointed to be spedely wrytten, both to your lordship and the
counsell of the states, and that Mr. Shyrley might be sent awey
with all spede. And whan the letters war redy wrytten, came
Poyntes from Mr. Hennadg, with letters from your lordship to me,
includyng a letter to hir majesty, which I spedely delyvered
with such good speches as in honesty becam me for your excuse.
She red your letter, and, in very truth, I found hir princely
<P 199>
hart touched with favorable interpretation of your actions,
affyrming them only offensyve to hir in that she was not made
prive, not now mislykyng that you had the authorite. Suerly I
had cause, and so I did, commend hir pryncely nature, in this
sort, of allowing both of yow for your good intention and
excusing yow of any spott of evill meaning. And having hir
majesty in this sort calmed, though it was not possible to mak
your lordship amendes, yet I thought good to hasten hir
resolution, which your lordship must now tak to come from a
favourable good mistress, for so truly she doth profess, and yow
must stryve with your natur to throw over your sholders that
which is past. Thus your lordship seeth I have bene somewhat
long, to shew you the course to bryng this honest gentleman, sir
Thomas Shyrley to this messadg, who suerly hath very honestly
behaved hymself for your lordship, and truly so hath Mr.
vice-chamberlen, and Mr. secretory, and bydden many stormy
speches. And now I will write no more hereof, but of some other
particular advises, the consideration whereof I leave to your
lordship as leisure may serve yow.
   My lord, untill the state of the queenes army by muster book,
and hir monthly charges, may appear more cleare, here will be no
further meanes for any more monney. At this present ther is paid
24,000 (^l.^) and that, added to hir majestyes former chardg of
52,000 (^l.^) maketh 76,000 (^l.^) which some hir majesty doth
often repeat with gret offence.
   My lord, I am very glad to see a disposytion of sendyng some
shippes from thence to impeach the Spanish king towards his
Indyes. It is a matter that many yers past I did project to the
princes of Oranges ministers to have been attempted. We here
that sir Francis Drake is a fearfull man to the king, and that
the king cold have been content that sir Francis had taken the
last yers flete, so as he had not gone forward to his Indies. We
here that he hath taken seven rych shippes on the coast of the
Indyes. I wish they war saf in the Thamiss.
<P 200>
   We ar here troubled to understand, that from Hamborg, and
Dansk, Lubeck, &c., there ar a gret nombre of hulkes laden for
Spayn, and do meane to pass about Scotland and Irland, as some
of them did this last yere, which they do attempt to avoyd all
steyss in our narrow seas. I wold to God your flete, now
intended from these countryes, cold mak a good prize of them,
for so shuld the king of Spain be unhable to defend his seas, or
to offend any other.
   My lord, wher yow wryte to me of that yow heare of
Champygnyes arantes, I will tell yow what I know thereof, and
what els is knowen to any other, I cannot wryt of. There is an
Itallion merchant in Antwerp that pretendeth acqueyntance with
Champigny, and he hath wrytten hither to another merchant to
know, whyther hir majesty can be content to come to peace with
the king of Spayn. The answer is made, that, by the publication
published, it is to be sene wherfor hir majesty hath sent hir
forces into the Low Countreys, and, if the king of Spayn shall
satisfye hir majesty in honor, accordyng to hir protestation, by
restoryng to these countryes liberty and peace, and remove all
men of warr from thence, and restore to hir own subjectes ther
losses, she can be content to heare any honorable offer from the
king, and otherwise, she myndeth to persist in defence of hir
neighbors, and recovery of hir subjectes losses. This answer is
made by wordes only, but not from hir majesty, and whyther
Champigny will any farther procede I know not, but suer I am, he
hath no cause to make any avant hereof, and I trust ther nede
shall mak them sooner yeld than any cause to come of this
answer.
   It may be that ther are other lyke motions made to hir
majesty, but I thynk suerly hir majesty myndeth not to show any
yelding, for, God be thanked, she hath no cause but to expect
the yelding to come from the king of Spayn and his mynisters.
   And, wher your lordship wryteth, that the comming of my son
from the Bryll in this tyme may brede some dowt in mens
concepts,
<P 201>
suerly, my lord, sir Thomas Shyrley can tell yow, that, uppon
his report of his sickness, with daunger not to recover without
changyng the ayre to come into England, the queens majesty
hearyng therof, without any motion of me, commanded Mr.
secretory to send hym hir licenss, with all possible spede, and,
as I understand from hymself, he is much discomforted with the
noysomes of the place, wher the water is not only brakkish, but,
being heated on the fyre it stynketh. He also fyndeth the town
in a manner utterly unfurnished of ordonnance, and without
powder and bollets, so as, in very truth, it was as good out of
hir majestyes handes, by reason of the chardg, as to have it
only in a name. But how this should be remedyed I know not, for
hir majesty will not yeld to any more chardg, and I see the
states unwillyng to paye that which they ow; and by a clause in
the treaty, they ar bound to furnish both the towns of Flushyng
and Brill uppon your lordships demand, as hir majestyes
governor-generall, and, if there be any hope furder, it must
procede from your lordship as governor of the provynces with the
counsell of the state. I thynk sir Philip Sidney hath also some
want of ordonnance, but nothyng lyk to that of the Brill, wher
ther ar not above seven peces, few ynough for one bullwark, but
the daunger is not to be feared as long as your lordship shall
prosper in your government. My son, also, brought thyther two
hundred footmen and tifty horss, but he never cold get penny for
them, nor on penny to that garrison sence he had the chardg; and
yet it may be that hath had some help of late, for the tresorer
did wryte that your lordship gave hym order to help them with
some monny. I am now in dowt to wryte any furder for troublyng
of your lordship, knowing how infinitt your occupations be to
wryte and to reade, besides contynuall actions.
   By such letters as shall come from hir majesty you shall fynd
as much comfort from hir majesty as you have receaved
discomfort, though ther be gret differencees in the effect, for
the former I know hath depely wounded your hart, and these
cannot sodenly
<P 202>
synk so low as the wond is, but your lordship must add to this
your own fortitud of mynd. And so I most hartely wish yow to be
strengthened by Godes speciale grace.
   Your lordships most assuredly,
   W. Burghley.
   31. Martii, 1586.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 202>
[} [\LETTER LXXIV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. MARCH OR APRIL, 1586.\] }]
   Sir, I have mett with dyvers letters and inteligences that
the pope hath greatly labored some desperatt persons to doe
vyolence to hir majesty. The prince of Parma of late dyd use
very brode speches, saying, that he dyd not fear the Englyssh
ayd, yt wold not contynew many wekes, meaning hir majesties
lyfe. I wold not putt yt into my letters for yt wold [\fear\]
hir majesty I know, albeyt I doe not mystrust yt, yf you hold a
good course at home. God hath and wyll defend hir, I dowbt not,
but gett hir from London into som countrey well affected for
this somer, and the soner the better. Woodstock wer a good
place, and a holsome, or to Farnam, for yt ys hard for any
suspected persons to com so farr but som or other wyll gyve
knoledge; and, as I hear, hit ys plent now to use some
straunger, and, under collor of merchants, to make sute at the
court, and an Italian that cam iiij days past from Antwerp told
me, that a dere frend of his declared to him,
<P 203>
that ther wer two jesuyttes of Bruges, one a Walloun, and the
other of those partes lykewyse, had undertaken a great
enterprise in Englond, and did say they had pretences inow to
com to the court. I am promysed they shalbe dyscrybed to me, but
you must banyshe your popish Low Countreymen that suckes all
honye ther and be lazy drones and worse, and lett good wach be
leyd among the merchantes for such ij fellowes. They be yong
men, and seme as merchantes, but very lewd and wyked. I besech
you, for Godes sake, lett no respect of comodyus lying about
London cause hir saftye to be neglected, and albeyt she is in
all places in the handes of God, yet yt ys good to advoyd the
most lykliest places for harme. Ther be few careful about hir.
And you kepe hir tyll Mychelmas, by the grace of God, all ys
past for those thinges.
   Yf hir majestie meane to use my servyce, I trust you will
send som boddy, that yt may appere here to men that you sett a
lytle more store by me than hetherto ther ys cause for them to
think, for ther was never yet so much as a letter wrytten to any
person here of any thankes for those curtesies I had received
before you hard any thing of this place. And, how yll soever hir
majestie may conceave of me, yet these men have deservyd great
thankes for there good wyll to hir, as ever any people could
doe. And these many letters you must remember; first, to the
states generall, than to the councell of estate, and one to the
councell and towen of Utryght. I wold fayn have more but I fear
yt wyll hinder the rest. The rest may be hereafter.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 204>
[} [\LETTER LXXV. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 1ST
APRIL 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, aftir that I had yesterday wrytten my
letter unto yow, being perswaded that sir Thomas Shyrley shuld
tak his leave that morning, as hir majesty promised over night,
whan she also agreed uppon certen letters redy to be signed, as
they war joyntly by Mr. secretory [{and{] me devised to content
hir, I went to London, and comyng back this morning, I found by
Mr. secretory a chaung of the former nightes resolution
alltogither very absurd and perilloose.
   And so this morning, at sermon tyme, we cam to hir majesty,
and, for myn own part, I told hir majesty, that I marvelled she
should so chaung to the worss, but, after manny argumentes, she
yelded [{to{] alter ageyn to hir formar resolution, as by the
letters sent both to yourself, to sir Thomas Hennadg, and to the
counsell of [{the{] states, may particularly appeare, which,
though all be [{not{] as I wold, yet it is as neare therto as
hir majesty [{can{] be brought unto; for wher hir majesty, by
hir alteration yesterdaye, wold have yow assembled the generall
states, and [{upon{] ther advise to have gyven you a quallefyed
power, without any other title than as hir lieutenant, I found
that both peri[{lous{] and absurd, and therfor did draw to this
form, that yow [{should{] contynew in your office untill the
counsell of states cold devise how to quallefy this matter. And,
for that I presume that [{they{] cannot in any congruete, nor,
with the good quietnes of ther state, devise any such, I rest
satisfyed in opinion [{that{] the country shall contynew
<P 205>
in your government, for the m[{ost{] benefitt of the country
itself.
   My son is at Gravessend, but not hable to com to the court; I
am sorry of the cause of his comming. He sendeth me word, that,
for want of monny, he hath left a lamentable company of his
soldiers at Bryll, and he hath disbursed of his own so much, as
he cam home with v=li=. The tresor is redy to be imbarked this
evening. From Grenwich, (\primo Aprilis\) , 1586.
   Your lordships most assured,
   W. Burghley.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my very good lord, the
erle of Leicester, lieutenant and governor-general of her
majesties forces in the Low Contryes.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 205>
[} [\LETTER LXXVI. MR. SECRETARY WALSINGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 1ST APRIL 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, I pray [{that{] the compfort you now
receyve
<P 206>
come [{not{] to late bothe for your selve and [{the{] cause. I
never knewe her [{majesty{] better affected towardes you
[{than{] she seemethe to be nowe, [{and{] , for that she dothe
now testefye [{the{] same unto you by her letter wrytten with
her owne hand, I shall not need to dwell uppon that matter. I
pray [{that{] this favor may be accompag[{ned{] with effectes by
well farth[{ering{] of the cause.
   She h[{ath{] alreadye assented to the [{levy{] of
voluntaryes, but [{still{] she wyll be fownde strayte [{in the{]
supplye of threasure. [{Your{] lordship shall doe well by your
letters to herselve to lay [{before{] her the dysproffyt she
[{receiveth{] by sending over threasure [{in such{] scant
measure as ther [{can be{] no full paye made. The [^NAME NOT
GIVEN^] that regardethe more his pu[{rse than{] his dutye
lykethe better of [{credit{] then of thorroughe paymentes.
   I may not forget to tell you, that sir Thomas Henneage hath
dealt towardes your lordship [{like a{] most honest faythefull
gentleman, having left nothing undon, by letters and message,
that might woorke your good towardes her majestye, whom, next
after God, I doe assure your lordship I thinke you have cause to
esteem to be a pryncypall instrument in the recovarye of her
favor, in that compfortable measure you now receyve the same.
This I wryte uppon verry goode grownde, to the ende your
lordship may use the gentleman with that thankefulnes that
apperteynethe, and as he worthely deservathe.
   Poore Mr. Davyson dothe take yt verry grevowsely that your
lordship shoolde conceyve so hardly of him as you doe, whoe I
doe beleve, by the great protestatyons he hathe made unto me,
hathe acquyted himselve honestly towardes your lordship. I fynde
the conceapt of your lordships dysfavor hath greatly dejected
him. At sooche time as he [{arrived{] her majestye was so
incensed agaynst your lordship as all the argumentes and orators
in the world could not have wrought any satysfactyon; and yt
[{may{] be ther hathe ben some [{yll{] reporte made unto your
lordship of the poore gentleman from [{hence.{]
<P 207>
   At the tyme of her majestye [{sig{]ning of the dyspatche she
let me understand, that Rawley, hearing of some [{rumours{]
geven owt here in coorte [{that{] he had ben an yll
inst[{rument{] towardes her agaynst [{your{] lordship, dyd
humbly desyre [{to{] have ben sent awaye w[{ith this{]
dyspatche, to the ende [{he might{] have justefyed himselfe
towardes your lordship, in case [{any{] sooche synister
[{information{] had ben gyven unto you agaynst him: which her
[{wish{] was that I shoold signe[{fy unto{] your lordship, and
to assure you, [{upon{] her honor, that the gentleman hathe don
good offices [{for you{] , and that, in the tyme of hir
dyspleasure, he dealt as earnestly for you as any other in this
world that professythe most good wyll towardes your lordship.
This I wryte by her majesties commaundment, and therfor I praye
your lordship to take knowledge therof, in suche sorte as you
shall thinke good.
   Touching the qualyficatyon her majesty so greatly affectethe,
I woold to God yt could be brought to passe accordingly as she
desyrethe, but I feare sooche a motyon at this present may breed
in the peoples heades there somme unnecessary jealowsye;
espetyally for that yt can not be don withowt an assembly of the
states generall. For her majesties contentement yt shall be well
don for the counsell of estate to sett downe sooche reasons as
may shew the inconveniences lykely to insue uppon sooche a
motyon, and to delyver them unto sir Tho. Henneage at the tyme
of his departure from thence. And I dowbt not but [{your{]
lordship wyll in tyme doe yo[{ur{] indeavor to brynge this to
[{pass{] which her majesty desyrethe, [{and that{] you wyll by
your next [{letters{] put her in compforte [{thereof{] , yf your
lordship shall see [{any{] lykelyhode to perfor[{m the same{] .
   Ther are dyvers here [{frequently{] with me to know what
[{allow{]aunce will be gyven for [{the{] levye of voluntaryes,
wherein I woold be glad to know from your lordship [{how{] to
answer.
   The gentleman that the [{master of Gray{] sent unto you
meanethe to repayre [{unto{] you owt of hande [{for{] your full
resolutyon towching his masters [{offer{] .
<P 208>
   The lord-admyrall com[{plaineth{] that the commyssions your
[{lordship{] grawntethe to her majesty[{es sub{]jects which
hawnt those [{countries{] dothe woorke somme [{prejudice{] to
his jurysdyetyon. He [{would{] be lothe any waye to offend your
lordship, and wyll be [{ready{] , for the savyng of his ryght,
to grawnte hys commyssyon to any that your lordship shall
recommend unto him.
   Towchyng the party that is gon to Spayne, whom your lordship
wysshed rather to have ben imployed emongest the malcontentes,
yt grewe of himselfe, uppon a conceypt that, being recommended
by the kyng of Spayn unto the prince of Parma, he shall be the
better able to serve your lordships torne.
   And so, prayeing your lordship to exscuse thes scrybled
lynes, wrytten with bothe a tyred head and hande, I most humbly
take my leave. At the coort, the fyrst day of Aprill, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra. Walsyngham.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my very good lord thearle
of Leicester, lieutenant-generall of her majestyes forces in the
Lowe Countreys.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 221>
[} [\LETTER LXXXI. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 11TH APRIL 1586.\] }]
<P 222>
   My very good lord, as I have alwaies thowght, sythence your
lordships first entrie into the charge you now howld, the
assystance of sir William Pelham most necessarye for your
lordship, so have I just cause, wayghing the late mutiny
happened at Utreck by a bande perteyning unto coronel Norryce,
to thinke the removing of the one as necessarye as the placyng
of the other. I see some reason to dowbt that the grownde of the
seyd coronells caryag of himself towardes your lordship grew by
practyce from hence. The nurishing of factyon at home and
abroade is thowght here the best coorse of pollecye, but the
myschefe yt wyll breed I feare wyll prove irreparable.
   I fynde, as your lordship wrytethe, that the partyes that doe
chefely possesse the coronell are but bad instrumentes, thowghe
I must neades confes that I have ben a chefe preferrer of somme
of them unto him. I woold to God that with his valewe and
courage he carryed the mynde and reputation of a relygyowse
sowldyer. The chefe exsperyence and nuryture that he hathe
receyved in the warre hathe ben in thos contryes where neyther
dyscyplin-mylytarye nor relygyon carryed any swaye, and therefor
yt hathe tawght him nothing elles but a kynde of a lycensyowse
and corrupt governement, sooche as being weyed eyther in
pollecye or relygyon can never prosper. I wyll, therfor, doe my
best indeavor, as well in respect of the cause as for the honor
and love I professe to bare unto your lordship, to procure the
speedye sending over of sir William Pealham, hoping that, nowe
your lordship standeth in verry gratyowse termes with her
majestye, she wyll be pleased, for your sake and her owne
servyce, to send him over.
   I feare your lordship shall be greatly dysapoynted in the
leavye of the voluntarye men, bothe in respect that many of the
partyes appoynted by your lordship to make the seyd levyes have
no
<P 223>
abylytye nor meanes to furnishe them, as also for that there are
verry harde brutes geven owt here of evyll usage of sowldyers
there, and of the great pauwryll and exstremytye they endure. Yf
your lordship coold fynde the meanes to furnishe the master of
Graye with an imprest of 2000=li=, to be sent hether, he myght
be able to bryng over with him 3000 footmen and 200 lyght horse.
I am of opynion that your lordship shoold be more readyly served
from that, than owt of this realme. Besydes the imployment of
that natyon in thos cuntryes (the same being with the good
allowaunce of the king) cannot but greatly further and grace the
cause, for, as I am informed, the brute thereof, as also that
there shoold be an offre made of certeyn reysters to be sent by
the king of Denmarke to serve under your lordship, doth verry
greatly troble the prince of Parma. The provysyons of money
promysed him owt of Spayn faule not owt accordyng to his
expectatyon.
   The enterpryse of sir Francis Drake layethe open the present
weakenes of the king of Spayn, for of late he hathe sollycyted
the pope and the dukes of Florence and Savoye for a loane of
500,000 [\Ducats\] , but cannot obteyne neyther the whole nor
parte of the sayd somme. The Genuoyse merchauntes that were wont
to furnishe him with money in tyme of necessytye, for that they
feare a revolt of the Indians, begyn to drawe backe.
   The repayre of thos of Bomel and Deventrye unto your
lordship, to offer themselves ther servyce and obedyence unto
her majestye, dothe shewe most manyfestly, that yf the cause
myght have ben thorrowghly countenaunced, the most part of the
provynces now possessed by the enemye woold have revolted er
this. But we heare are so greadye of a peace, in respect of the
charges of the warres, as in the procuring thereof we neyther
weyghe honor nor savetie. Somewhat here is a dealing under
hande, wherin ther is great care taken that I shoold not be made
acquaynted withall.
   I wyll not fayle, according to your lordships request, to
take order for the apprehensyon of Salesberye immedyatly uppon
his
<P 224>
returne hether. I have alwaye held a dowbtfull opynion of him,
having received somme informatyons ageynst him that gave just
cause of suspytyon. According as your lordship desyerethe I have
an espetyall care of sooche letters as your lordship desyerethe
to have pryvat to myselve, and therfor am perswaded that parte
of the adverticement your lordship maketh mentyon of, taken owt
of somme letter of yours sent hyther, was, I dare assure your
lordship, owt of non of thos sent unto me, and therfor I praye
your lordship caul to mynde to whom you dyd wryte to lyke
effect. For the proceadings in Fraunce and Scotlande I refer
your lordship unto the inclosed coppyes, and so I most humbly
take my leave.
   At the coorte, the xj=th= of Aprell, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra. Walsyngham.
   Sir Art. Basset, and Sir Jhon Chichester, and thre justices
more in Devonshire, are dead thorrowghe the infectyon of the
gaole. Baron Flowerdewe, one of the justyces of that cyrcute, is
also dead. The takyng awaye of well affected men in this corrupt
tyme shewethe that God is angrye with us.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 229>
[} [\LETTER LXXXIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 21ST APRIL, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, [{I am glad to perceive the{] great
chaynge
<P 230>
in your lordships letters, the one wrytten the v=th= the other
the vij=th= of this present, the fyrst full of dyspayre in
respect of the harde coorse helde here, the other full of
compfort uppon the receypt of her majesties gratyous letters,
and the happye success in the late conflyckt with the ennemye. I
doe assure your lordship I think her majesty tooke as muche joye
uppon the viewe of your letter, in seing you restored to your
former compforte grownded uppon her favor, as she dyd [{in{] the
overthrowghe of the enemye.
   Her highness is now pleased that [{a{] comyssyon be gyven for
the levy of the 300 men in northe . . wherin before she made
great dyffycultye. She hathe also commanded that all dylygence
be used in the sending over of the voluntarye men. I dowbt
greatly for lacke of money the captain wyll not be able to levye
them, and yf your lordship, besydes the imprest of the 1000=li=
I caused sir William Stanley to be furnyshed withall, doe not
also gyve order for a supplye of 500=li= to be sent unto him, he
shall never be able to brynge them of Irelande. He cannot get
them to be transported under xx=s= the man.
   I am earnestly desyred by Mr. Edward Dyer to move your
lordship that his brother Andrewe, thorrowe your good favor, may
be allowed after xx=s= the man for sooche nombers as he shall
bryng over. The states have offered unto him, by Mr. Ortell,
only xiij=s= iiij=d= the man, wheras in verry deede they cannot
be sett owt in that good sorte yt were fytt under xxx=s= the
man; and yt were muche better to have an armye compounded of
10,000 well furnished men, then 15,000 in sooche slender sorte
as heretofore they have been sent from hence. I doe heare, by
somme come from thence, that the harde allowance now made for
the levyes intended hathe growen owt of coronell Norryce advyce,
whoe notwithstanding, as he himself towld me, hathe ben allowed
by the states heretofore for all manner of charges after the
rate of . . . the man, which is verry skant.
   To the ende your lordship may see what instrumentes are used
<P 231>
in owre medyatyon of peace, I sende you the coppyes of certeyn
letters by good happ come to my handes. I have let her majesty
understande howe dangerowse and dyshonorable yt is for her to
have sooche base and yll affected mynisters used therin.
Norryce, the controwlers man, is bothe a notable papist and
hathe served Mounsyer heretofore as a spye. Yf eyther your
lordship or myselfe shoold use sooche instrumentes I knowe we
shoold beare no small reproche: but yt is the good happ of
hollow and dowbtfull men to be best thowght of. But, to returne
to the desyred peace, your lordship shall understand that
Grafini, sometymes Spinolas servaunt, having ben of late at
Antwerp is nowe returned, whoe reportethe that the prince of
Parma, understanding that he was to returne into England, sent
for him, and, after long speeche had of the awntyent amytye
betwen the howse of Burgundye and this crowne, the great
myschefe that bothe contryes were lyke to indure by the coorse
nowe held, and of the great good wyll he bare unto her majestye,
he prayed him to let eyther her majestye or somme of her
cownsell understande, that, althowghe he myght be thowghte more
inclyned rather to contynewe the warres then to affect peace,
yet no man woold be more wyllyng then himselve to be a medyator
therof, and, for that purpose, yf he myght understand that her
majestye wold lyke therof, he woold send somme well chosen
instrumentes unto her to make some sooche overture in that
behalf as she shoold have cause to lyke of. He dyd, for the
incoragement of Grafyni, assure him that the king shoold bestowe
some honorable rewarde on him, so as he coold bryng the same to
passe that some myght be sent over with her majestyes good
lykyng. He dyd, also, let him understande that Champigny tooke
uppon him [{too much{] in the matter, and that he had
intellygence with some person of qualytye within this realme
[{of{] the same, but that he dyd not lyke that he shoold be a
dealer therin, but woold rather imploy a contryman of his owne.
This myche have I receyved from her majestye towching Grafyinis
proceading, wherwith her plesure was I shoold acquaynt your
lordship, whoe doth
<P 232>
think meet that you shoold, yf you shall see no cause to the
contrarye, acquaynt the cownsell of the state there, that
certeyn overtures for peace are dayly made unto her, but that
she meanethe not to proceade therein without ther good lyking
and privyty, being perswaded that ther can be no peace made
profitable or suer for her that shall [{not{] also stande with
ther savetye, [{and{] that she dothe acknowledge [{hers{] to be
so lynked with thers as [{nothing{] can faule owt to ther
prejudyce but she must be partaker of theire harme. Her pleasure
ys, that you shall not acquaynt them with the partycularyties of
the overture, but woold have you deale with them in generall
termes, usyng the matter in sooche sorte as they may not enter
into any jealouse conceypt of any alyenation of her good meaning
towards them.
   I am glad that Kerseys trechery was dyscovered in tyme; I
praye God ther be no more of that crewe as lewdly dysposed as
he. I feare the lyttle hope that owre martyall men have of
rewarde wyll drawe somme of them to fayle in their dutye, and
therfore yt wyll behove your lordship to have a watchefull eye
of the looser sorte of the capteyns. But, to returne ageyn to
the peace, seing her majesty is so inclyned unto yt, and is
fownde altogether unapt to prosecute the warres, I cannot but
wyshe your lordship to be a pryncypall dealer therin, as well in
respect of your own honor as that I hope yt wyll be performed
with bothe honorable and profytable condytyons: wheras I dowbt,
yf yt passe to others hands, yt wyll not be so carefully dealt
in.
   I cannot but let your lordship understande that the
lord-chamberlyn hathe dealt verry honorably and frenly towards
your lordship of late, in causyng Weldon, sometyme pensyoner, to
be punished for delyvering, as he is charged thowghe by him
denyed, lewd speeches of your lordship. I fynde that bothe the
lord-admirall and he doe take yt verry kyndly that your lordship
dothe wryte so at large unto them, as you have of late don.
<P 233>
   Her majestye dothe longe to heare what is don uppon the last
dyrectyon geven to sir Thomas Henneage. I praye God owre nyce
dealyng therin doe not more harme, in respect of the lewde
brutes geven owt there, then may afterwarde be well repayred.
   I cannot but put your lordship in mynd to returne your speedy
awnswer to the master of Graye, towching the imprest I last
wrote of, for the levye. I wyll seeke to satysfye the duke of
Nevers towching the salt, in sooche sorte as he shall
notwithstanding thinke himselve behowlding unto your lordship.
   The Flusshingers have dealt hardely bothe with the 
lord-admyrall and me; wee shall be forced, for the relefe of
Thomson, to take some other waye of redresse. Eyther her
majestye must increase her garyson in that towne, or elles ther
must be somme devyce to imploye thos rude barbarouse maryners in
some longe vyage. And so, fearing I have over-tyred your
lordship with thes scrybled lines, I most humbly take my leave.
At the coorte, the xxj=th= of Aprill, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 236>
[} [\LETTER LXXXVI. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 25TH APRIL, 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, the news browght by sir William Russell
was verry welcom unto her majestye, yet dyd she not greatly lyke
to be pressed for the supplye of horsemen agreable with the
contract; she styll harpethe after peace, bothe in respect of
charges, as of some dowbt she hathe that somewhat wyll be
attempted ageynst her own person, and, therfor, seing she dothe
so greatly thirst after yt, I cannot, as I wrote unto you in my
former, but
<P 237>
wyshe your lordship to be a chefe dealer therin; yt were a grete
wronge, consydering the brunte and burden of warres your
lordship susteynethe, that peace shoold be made withowt you. Yt
were not amysse that your lordship tooke somme apt occasyon, by
your owne letters unto her majestye, to let her understand no
les.
   I have let my lords here understande, how unkyndly your lord
ship takethe yt that you heare so seldom from them, and that
sythence your charge there you never receyved any letter of
advyce from them. They awnswer, as yt is trothe, that, her
majestye reteyning the whole dyrectyon of the causes of that
contrye to herself and sooche advyce as she receyvethe
underhand, they knowe not what to wryte or to advyce. She can by
no meanes, as I have heretofore wrytten unto your lordship,
indure that the causes of that contrye shoold be subiect to any
debate in cownsell, otherwyse than as she herself shall dyrect,
and therfor men forbear to doe that which otherwyse they woold.
   I sende your lordship sooche thinges as were yesterdaye
propounded to ther lordships in cownsell, with theire
resolutyons taken thereuppon. Mr. Dawtrye tellethe me, who
attendethe here by sir William Stanleys appoyntment, your
lordships resolutyon towching a further supplye of money besydes
the 1000=li= alreadye delyvered unto sir William Stanley, that
they cannot be conveyed owt of Ireland under xl=s=. the man. The
only transportatyon will cost a 1000=li=. Yf your lordship
cannot drawe the states to yeld that allowance, then were yt
meet sir William Stanley were speedyly made acquaynted withall,
to the end he may forbeare further proceading.
   I learne by letters owt of Flawnders, that the enemye
meanethe to sende all his forces towardes Guelderlande, in hope
to drawe you to a fyght, which I hope your lordship wyll geve
order that the same shall be avoyded, unles yt shall be uppon a
mervaylowse advawntage. Yf an overthrowghe shoold happen yt
woold put in hazarde the whole cause, for we are not armed here
with that constancy that shoold endure sooche a revers without
dysmay.
<P 238>
My lords mean shortely to sende sir William Pelham unto you with
there best advyce in this wayghtye poynte. I thinke yf your
lordship dyd convert some of your soldyeres into pyoners, you
shoold have great use of them, bothe for defence and to bryng
you to fyght uppon advauntage.
   And so, having for the present no other thinge to imparte
unto your lordship, I most humbly take my leave. At the coorte,
the xxvth of Aprill, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
   Ther hathe fawlen owt no electyon this S=t=. Georges feast.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honourable my verie good [\lord\]
the earle of Leycester, lord lieutenaunt-generall of her
majesties forces in the Lowe Countries.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 239>
[} [\LETTER LXXXVII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 26TH APRIL, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, howe this unlooked for alteratyon
happenethe at this tyme, when the goodnes of God, thorrowghe the
most happye coorse and successe thinges take there, owght to
have led her majestye to have proceaded most resolutely in the
cause, I knowe not, nor can by no meanes imagen how the same
shoold be wrowght. Ther was only cauled unto the resolutyon the
lord thresorer and I. He moved her to staye the resolutyon
untyll sir Thomas Henneages returne; he shewed her that ther was
nothing don contrarye to her dyrectyon; he protested unto her,
that, yf she dyd goo forwarde with the resolutyon, yt woold
utterly overthrowghe
<P 240>
the cause. She grewe so passyonat in the matter as she forbad
him to argue any more. Suerly there is somme trecherye amongest
owreselves, for I cannot thinke that she woold doe this of her
owne heade. I conceyve also, that ther are bad offyces don from
thence by secreat letters sent hether, by the which they doe
advertyce that the states shall not be able to yeld the
contrybutyons promysed, so as the burden of the warres wyll
lyght on her majestye. She is the rather confyrmed in this
opinion, for that your lordship dyd sygnefye unto her, that the
contrybutyons came verry slowly in. Now hereuppon I gather, that
her majestye, dowbtyng that a greater charge wyll be cast uppon
her then she shall be able to beare, wherby she shall be forced
to abandon the actyon, she conceyveth yt may be don with lesse
dyshonor, being an assyster, then when her mynister shall carrye
the tytle of absolute governor. I conjecture also, yt may growe
upon a hope of a peace; for that, as I am secreatly informed,
ther is a save-conduct sent over unto Champigny, eyther for
himselve or some other, that shall secreatly repayre into this
realme. Sorrye I am, that your lordship shoold be so yll
handeled as not to be made acquaynted with the proceadinges
here, having ingaged yourselve so far as you have don for her
majestyes servyce. I looked that her majestye woold have wrytten
letters of thankes, bothe unto your lordship and others there of
good desert, bothe strayngers and her own subiectes, but we are
more apt to wownde then to compfort. God geve your lordship
pacyence to beare thes crosses, to whos protectyon I commyt you,
most humbly takyng my leave. At the coorte, the xxvj=th= of
Aprell, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honourable my verie good lorde the
earle of Leycester, lord lieutenant-generall of her majesties
forces in the Lowe Countries.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 248>
[} [\LETTER XCI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 30TH APRIL, 1586.\] }]
<P 249>
   Mr. secretary, I did writt ij dayes past to you at some
lenght, and in that letter by chaunce haue answered some thinges
that your last letter of the xxj=th= of Aprill doth require,
which letter I receaued this last of Aprill; but one thinge I
must cheifly remember and thanke you for, which is, that I neuer
receaued letter, or word, of comfort from you, since I came
over, but by this letter. I would be sorrie my enemie, much
lesse my freind, should suffer such a time as I did, almost
foure monethes together; but the blessednes of England I see
hath made manie forgett the miseries of others. God grant me his
grace to strengthen me in this service, and that he will send
her majestie victorie over all her enemyes; and that poore men,
whoe doe hazard there life, honor, and liveing, maie be better
remembred then I haue bine. But now that her majesties good
favor is promised me, and is the onlye worldlie thinge I begge
of God, I doe greatlie quiet myself, and doe protest, even
before the majestie of the eternall judge, that I haue sought
nothinge in this service of mine, but, first, the glory of God,
and, next, the saftye and service of her majestie, for which
respect He doth knowe, and I doe feele, I haue lost the sweet
comfort of her majesties presence, my most gratious soueraigne,
the safe protection of my happy countrey, the contented life
among my deere and loveinge freinds, and the libertye with all
comfort in a most blessed state. What I purchase here, insteed
<P 250>
of all theis, lett my companies and beholders witnes. But if x
times worse were possible to be felt, and maie doe my gratious
mistress but half the service I desire, with enioying her favor,
all would be pleasure, ioy, and comfort; for I knowe, if God be
pleased, this accion must needs turne to her majesties great
securitie, or ells was I vnhappy to enter into it. Well, sir, I
thanke you now, at last, that I receaued some lines of comfort
from you; as that her majestie is my good ladye, that she will
assist me in her service here, with licensinge of voluntary men
to come over, in favoring sir Wylliam Stanleys fechinge men out
of Ireland, in imparting to me the offers for peace.
   For the voluntaries, I trust noe way to chardge her majestie,
but shall all be borne here, and shortlie to send moneie over;
there are v or vj=c= come already, whoe had prestes out of my
owne purse.
   For sir William Stanley, also, I will speedily send over to
you for that you haue prested, as also to send him a further
prest, wishing of God that it had pleased her majestie to haue
sent, or yet to send, sir William Pelham over. I knowe, I say I
knowe it, that all the debt he oweth had bine saved another way
if he had bine here, beside the great service to the whole
cause, as you shall find in a tickett, &c.
   Touching the matter of peace, I haue, I thinke, said in my
other letter as much as I now can say. And I doe most humbly
beseech her majestie to consider well of it. I perceaue that I
heard here is true, and confirmed by your letter, soe that there
is dealing for peace as well by Grefyne as others, which
intelligences being so knowen caused me to take that course
which I perceaue her majestie doth will me, which is, to let the
councellers vnderstand of the meanes which are offered her
majestie, as, in very troth, I haue done but to the wisest sort
of them, alwaies to
<P 251>
prevent the hearing of it; for theie be very subtill, and as
suspicious people as ever I delt withall, which made me to vse
some speech of this matter to them; how greatly her majestie is
sought for peace, and how carefull I knowe she wilbe to doe anie
thing to their hurt. And theie beleeue she is soe, for I tell
you theie knowe it, and I am sorry I haue not heard sooner, for
I haue often writen what I haue heard of this matter, that I
might haue authority to say somethinge, as, I thanke God, I did
it sondry times of myself, to avoid the iealousye. And I knowe
it hath done great good, and sir Thomas Henneage declaracion
thereof, also, did exceeding much good, and confirmed in good
time, and fully, that I had said before to them.
   But to the peace, what I thinke I referre you to my other
letter, protesting, before God, I desire nothing more in this
world then a good and sure peace for her majestye, being I knowe
most agreable to her best liking, whome, next God, I would in
all dewtifull service most please, and, beside, I am most
perswaded that all good Christians ought to seeke and preferre.
My onlie advice doth tend to haue her majestie haue as sure
peace as in reason may be gotten. And I doe verilie thinke, as
matters stand here, if her majestie will vse her advantage, she
shall bringe the kinge, and specially this prince of Perma, to
seeke it in other sort then by waie of merchantes. I can assure
you he was never soe deiected, nor soe mallancholy, since he
came into these countreys, as he is at this daye, nor so far owt
of courage. I protest vnto you, I would gage my life and
creditt, if I were supplied as were but reasonable, I would haue
Antwerpe towne and Burges or midd June. This last overthrow is
greater then you there can imagin, with the vitelling of Grave,
being a towne of greatest importance of all the places we hould
in theis provinces, for Brabant, Gelders, Vtryckt, and Over
Isell, being the very passage into all those places, saving into
Gelders the enemie maie goe another way, but far worse and more
discomodious, and the prince made as sure accompt of it as ever
he did of anie skonce that he
<P 252>
tooke in hand. His men doe marvellously beginn to mutinie; manie
run away, specially Spaniards.
   I thinke I wrot to you, how Shenks lieutenant very latlie
again hath overthrowen, nere Mustryckt, aboue v=c= footmen,
whereof onlie l are kild, and a c with their cheif ainsynes
taken and brought awaie, with losse of five or sixe at most; he
himself was, and is, here with me, about a service presentlye to
be done, in building a fort whereby we will choke vpp Newmeagen,
and stopp all vittells that waie to the enemie.
   The count Hollocke is here also, a most noble gentleman, and,
to deale plainlie, geuing every man his right, he was the cheife
cause, vnder God, of our days victorye, wherein, beside his
valiant behaviour, he delt as like a good souldier as ever I
heard of, and afterwards, for the vitellinge the towen, in his
person he did most desperatlye adventure it, and went into it
himself, where he past a 1000 shott of muskett and caliver, and
a c shott of cannon and great ordinance; surelye he is to be
honored and cherished. Shenks is a worthy fellow. I made ij
knights as theie shuld be, one having a bloodye wound, thother
not whole of a shott thorow his thigh at the overthrow at Werll,
where he slew almost iij=m= men of the enemies, which was
Shenke, thother Mr. John Norris, whoe was but newly hurt, and is
as valiant a gentleman as ever liued, and he giues this
commendacion to the count Hollock that I tell you for that dayes
service, whome, before his face, he saw kill a Spaniard with his
pistell, when thother was ready to throst his pike thorow him;
these two knights deserved it well.
   I am likewise in assured hope to drawe awaie from the enemie
furthwith ij=c= of his best Albanesines, whoe be his cheif
<P 253>
horsmen. I haue spoken this daie with the capten, whoe is
secretlie stollen hether to me, being within a dayes iourney or
litle more of their troupes, being not farr of Grave; he is as
manlike a gentleman as euer I looked vppon, and Shenks tels me,
the onlie leader among them. He asketh me nothing till he brings
his bandes to me. I assure you there cannot be a thinge will
frett the prince more at the heart. This man doth tell me for
all troth, vppon his owne knowlege, that there is three hundred
Italians and Spaniards of his best cauallery gone to the duke of
Guise against his will, and that he hath written to the duke
against them, but he keeps them, and hath done this moneth. This
capten was in hight of the fraye at Grave, but the waters kept
all the horsmen off; he doth assure me that there was not so few
as vj=c= Spaniards kild, and the verie flowre of all their
campe, but don John de Aquilau is alive, whoe we thought was
kild; soe that for peace, you maie see whether it be not like
that it wilbe sought in better sort at her majesties hands then
by merchants. I am borne in hand of all, the lords and cheif
gentlemen of Heynalt, Arteyes, and Flaunders will seeke it, and
presse the prince for it, and there is one that will giue me
knowlege verie shortlie thereof, and, if I be not abused, the
prince and kinge both will dailie, as longe as theie can, to
entertain, talke of peace, and to discourage these countreys
thereby, before theie will either harken indeed to a peace, or
to treat of anie. And, vnder corection be it spoken, if these
men here conceave once her majestie to be in hand with a peace,
theie are gone without once looking back, and will make their
men, and overthrow her majesties, or lett me suffer for it. God
I take to record, vppon that I haue conceaued, and what you haue
written, of her majesties disposition, I would creepe vppon the
ground as farr as my hands and knees would bere me, to haue a
good peace for her majestie, but my care is to haue a peace
indeed, and not a shew of it to devid her freinds and her
insonder; they loaue her not that wish that kind of weake
dealing. Yf all the Spanish faction in England
<P 254>
procure her majestie a peace fitt for hir, in any respect, lett
me be hanged for it. Nay I thinke, if you or I should shew to
haue so much creditt that waie as some doe as I heare of in
England, I doubt whether we should be thought worthy to be
hanged or noe; but I haue not to doe with other mens doings, God
preserve her majestie, and send her trew faithfull councellors.
And the best waie for a good peace, I thinke still, is to bring
it by a good sharp warr; and if I had monie, noe more but that
her majestie hath promised to imploye here for this yeare, if
her majestie be not sought and sought againe, as she should be,
lett me beare the blame. But, soe long as pedlers and merchantes
be seking and paultringe in so weighty a cause, the enemy will
make his profitt of it, or, if it were knowen that I did but
advise thus much, the enemy would be in the greatest prid in the
world, and hold out to the vttermost houre, whereas now, hard
handling must doe the feate, without conceat of hasty or easy
beleeuing. Thus, I pray you beare with my tedious writinge, and
lett me certenly knowe her majesties will and pleasure therein
indeed, for what her will is must be obeyed, and, after I knowe
it, I will deall accordingly, by the grace of God, to the
vttermost of all my witt.
   I receaue even now a lettre from Amsterdam, by which it is
written, that the kinge of Denmark hath stayed in the Sound a
great nomber of shipps, and will suffer none to passe except he
promise, or put in bands, not to goe either to Spaine or to
Portugall; if it be true, as I doe verilie hope it is, hit is a
verie happy matter for her majestie.
   I thinke it will fall out plainely that [\John\] Jentile
which I wrote to you of, that came to the princes of Symeye,
seming to discouer that he was hired to poison her from her
husband, came onlie to doe it to me; all circumstances of his
speeches leanes to it. He was not yet put to anie torture, but
he shalbe, his tales
<P 255>
be so full of contrarietyes and doubtes as he beginnes now to
wish himself dead, and craves mercye. He confesseth now his
meaning was to serve me, and he doubteth there be others that
haue comission for the matter, though he hath not; but all is
one for him or anie other, my God hath chardge of me, and will
not suffer their malice to take place. Yf it should, welcome be
his blessed will, hit is for a good cause and soe I am at a
point, and yet will I be as carefull as I may be. Thus God haue
you in his good keeping. From Vtrickt this last of Aprill.
   Your assured freind.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 258>
[} [\LETTER XCIV. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 6TH MAY, 1586.\] }]
   Mr. secretary, I could not answere your letter which came by
the pursevant before this, for that I haue bine two dayes busie
at the musters, and giuing order for the paiment of soldiours,
which falleth out soe short as hit is pitty to see it; but I am
going now into the feild with such forces as I am able to make.
The cheifest cause, to withstand the prince of Permas
enterprises in these parts, coming, as I am credibly aduertised,
in person, with xviij cannons to batter Grave, which if he doe,
I trust to prevent his intention. Some other causes there be of
great necessitye to settell these partes, and I see, except I
goe myself with these companies, this campe will hardly be
mainteined or kept together. There is some emulacion amonge the
commandours, and captens over-hard to their souldiors, and, by
my will, there shalbe noe advantage giuen the enemye throwe our
disorder. I will take the more paine myself among them, by the
grace of God.
   For the matter your pursevant brought, I haue answered in a
letter by Aty to her majestie. I will not faill to obey her
comandement very precisely. And, for my owne parte, I was at the
point at the first time sir Thomas Henneage came, and offered
most
<P 259>
reddily to satisfye her majesties comandement, but much more now
I trust her majestie is not offended with me, and I care not how
sone I be deliuered of this burthen, speciallie since I find it
noe way acceptable to hir majestie, the service of this
countrey, for, I thanke God, I haue neither done her majestie
anie dishonour here, nor haue had anie ill successe for her
service, yet haue I had as little thankes, and as great blame,
as he that had lost a countrey or a battell. Well! for the
obseruing of her majesties pleasure for this last commandement,
albeit we had very good warrant for it, hit shalbe done, as
soone as sir Thomas Henneage comes. And if I maie find anie
grace to be honestly revoked, I will take it more thankfullie
then some men that should receave x=m=.=li= for a reward.
   I trust in this voyage, if God lett me liue, to settell all
these partes thorowly for a good while. I will then retorne to
Hage except I heare of anie sege, either of Berges or Ostend. Of
Ostend I cannot thinke; Berges is more like, and yet if he take
it not in 2 dayes, which I thinke he shall never, without
treason bringe aboue ij=c= men in it, I will warrant we will
reliue it well enough.
   There be allready viij or ix=c= men come over, and the states
will entertaine them all, and the rest that come, and I am in
good hope the meanes will rise verie great for the maintenance
of all theire charges here, yf her majestie will goe thorow with
this matter. I would God my lord Gray, or some other noblemen,
were here to supply this place, not doubting but theie should
farr better accomplish this service then I can, and their
service farr better accepted then mine is. Hit sufficeth me that
my conscience doth witnes with me that I doe serve her majestie
as in the presence of the Almightie; I pray God send me but her
majesties reasonable fauor for it.
   I am sorry I had not knowledge enough to send you worde of
the great embassage the kinge of Denmark doth send to her
majestie, which, as it is reported, is the greatest that euer
went
<P 260>
out of the east countreys; his expectacion is great of her
majesties forwardnes in their causes. I praie God he maie
receaue that comfort I wish. He hath again made offer to me of
his ij=m= royters, and I beseech you, sir, lett it be
acknowledged there to his embassador.
   I am here perplexed in my soule for the vntowardly dealing
for our money. I assure you here is not a full moneth to pay the
soldiours at this time, and there is none paid but Brill,
Ostend, and Flushing. I doe protest to you, if I were as well
encouraged to serve as ever I was, I would not deale anie more
with her majesties servants here, hauing such disbursers of the
monie. I doe assure you it is enough to ouerthrow all our whole
service here, and there is noe speaking nor warning, theie
presume either vppon chaunge or favour, or som what, for never
man hath dealt soe playnely nor soe rigorously as I haue done,
but theie care not one pennie for it; theie say theie must and
will answere it. You shall doe well, whosoeuer haue the chardge
here, to direct the treasor to his chardge vntoucht or vnbroken
vpp, and thin the treasorer to make his reconing, and to receaue
out, that which is due to be paid, and that which remaines to be
locked vpp vnder ij keys; for my parte if anie come before my
departure, surely I will neither make pay nor warrant if he
delivered any penny before yt come to me. The auditor is both
simple and fearefull, and, except you appoint another comission,
I dare vndertake her majestie shall loose xx=m= mark, at least,
in this already past. What a thinge is this, Mr. secretary, that
the poore stervid wreches that have susteined penury this iiij
monethes almost full, shall haue but one moneths pay, and not
that, now to goe to the feild. Withall, by your leaue, I must
say it againe, you did her majestie and yourself
<P 261>
wronge, when you appointed such officers, so vnited, as you did,
specially being interessed as theie were. For my parte, I trust
I shall stay noe time here; yf I should, I would never agree to
haue this man deall with the money agein, I will command noe
souldiours [{...{] and, as the souldiers hath noe pay but for a
moneth, soe is there no officer in the feild paid anie thinge
but myself. It is verie late, yet I wish there were care in
time.
   As for peace, I am at a point. My care was for hir majestie
and the realme, and I wilbe hanged when she shall haue a good
peace but as I wrote to you, and therefor there needes noe hast,
matters going as theie doe; but I am noe fitt councellor in
this. God speed it well, and keep you alwaies. At Hamersford
this 6. of May.
   Your assured freind.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 264>
[} [\LETTER XCVI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 9TH MAY, 1586.\] }]
   I am sorry to trouble you with the discomfortable dealings of
of our treasurer here; I assure you it passeth, and our auditor
a foole in comparison to mete with there subtelties. I saw this
day an abstract. I see there is yet due to souldiers aboue
x=m=.=li= when all this monie almost shalbe paid that cam last.
This coronel Norris doth match the late earle of Sussex, of all
men that euer I haue sene, for such matters, and sett
countenaunce withall vppon them. I trust you will provide for my
speedye cominge home; but, if I tarrie, either lett an other
dispencer of the monie be appointed, or lett it be deliuered
into my custodye, that their be noe paiments made before a
perfect reckoning cast vpp; for, if it goe on with the rest as
with this past, I will warrant a full third parte lost
<P 265>
from her majestie and the souldiers now. I haue so often spoken
I haue done, for I will not beare anie burthen at the souldiers
and captens hands, for all the treasure in this countrey. And
howsoeuer the matter is, the treasurer hath some back hope, and
little doth care what fault I find.
   This day I heard for certen, that, vpon the new supplie of
men I caused to be sett into Grave, which was 350 with 4 or 5
very good captens, the enemye attemptinge to take and spoyle a
subvrbe to Grave, being about 1000 Spaniards, theie haue lost
dead in the place 400, all Spaniards, such as they lost before
for gallant fellowes, soe that there is a good abatment of them
of late. We heare the prince doth meane to follow that seige
still, but now I little feare that place, for this 350 fresh
lusty souldiers having vittels, store, and munition, is a good
assurance; beside, the place is stronge, and well fortified, and
hath more with these last, beside burgers, which are stout and
willing fellowes and well trained. Their is 1000 able souldiers,
and the burgers stronge 800. And I am now here, provided to
rescue anie place the prince shall attempt. I am v=m=. footmen
and 1500 hors. This day I haue sent most of my horsmen into the
Betowe toward Newmeagin. I sent Shenks two daies since with 1000
footmen
<P 266>
to take a peice of ground called Mellin, where I haue appointed
a fort to be made, which shall stopp all cariage by watter
betwene Newmeagin and their campe at Grave. It maie be that I
will putt that towne in hazard, at the least I will [\leave\]
them noe places to hinder vs vppon the Reyne betwene Newes and
this towne. Yf the enemie attempt Burges vp Some, as a brute
there is, I will sone relieve it, by the grace of God, and yet
there is both good store of men and victells in it, neither doe
I greatlie mistrust anie place now that I am in the feild, that,
either by watter or land, I can recover anie place, nether doe I
thinke that the prince can well tell what yet to doe. God send
me good successe this iorney, and well to acquit me of this
countrey, and some happier man to stepp into it. Soe God be with
you, and to morow I will lodge toward Newmeagin, with my
companie altogether, from whence you shall heare as occasion
will serve. In some hast at Arnham, this ix. of May, without
money or ware.
   Your assured freind.
   Yf you send not speedlye a nimbler fellow then this auditor
there will neuer fault appere.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 266>
[} [\LETTER XCVII. LORD BURGHLEY TO SIR THOMAS HENEAGE. 13TH
MAY, 1586.\] }]
<P 267>
   Good Mr. threasurer, although theare is heare matter mines
[\tiring?\] plentifullie to write uppon concerning the subiect
of your charge, yet, bicause the same conteineth noe such
resolucion as both I have advised and wished, I doe forbeare to
enlarge the discours thereof by particulers, and breefelie doe
concurr with Mr. vice-chamberlaine, whoe nowe writeth to youe
such an imperfect resolucion as hir majesty hath delivered unto
him, nothing agreable to our advises.
   Uppon manie urgent and poignant cawses, as I maie so terme
them, I have advised hir majesty to permitt my lord of Leicester
to continue in the gouverment of thos cuntries, wherein God hath
latelie prospered him, and that you, being sick, might retorne
without following that hazardous course that is appointed to
you: but hir majestie will neither allowe of the one nor of the
other, but she saith, that you shall goe backe, and doe that she
hath commaunded you, which she is content to interprete in this
sort, that though she still misliketh that my lord of Leicester
hath accepted the title of governor-generall of thos provinces,
yet she meanethe not that he should presentlie or hastelie leave
it, bicause of the inconveniences that might happen to the
publique cawse by want of gouverment; and yet hir mind is, that
you should conferre with his lordship and the counsell theare,
yea, you should also further the same, that it might be devised
there by authoritie of the states, howe my lord might forbeare
the title and absolute authoritie of the gouvernor of thos
provinces, and yet, remaining with the title and authoritie of
her majesties lieutenant-generall,
<P 268>
to have, by the graunt of the estates, authoritye according to
the articles of the mutuall treatie with the counsell of the
states, to order, governe, reforme, and direct the martiall
affaires in like sort as his lordship nowe maie doe, by the
comission of the states whearebie he is made theire 
governour-generall; and this is that hir majestie desyreth, and
wisheth to be done, and, to that ende, would have by your meanes
conference had betwixt my lord and the counsell, howe this maie
be brought to passe, and thowgh, if it can be so compassed, it
cannot by anie likelood be browght to passe without sum length
of tyme, and manie circumstances and difficulties, yet hir
majesty willeth you to retorne, with the report of such
conclusion as shall fall owt uppon this conference betwixt my
lord, yourself, and the counsell of the states: and further,
also, hir majestie plainely saith, that she would not have my
lord to leave this authoritie untill she shall, uppon your
retorne, understand howe, and in what manner, this devise shall
be thowght faisible to be done, withowt anie evident danger of
the common cawse. In this sort you see howe I take hir majesties
wordes and mind, and so also I thinke you shall perceive the
like, or equivallent, from Mr. vice-chamberlaine and Mr.
secretarie, for with noe other would hir majestie deale in this
cawse, as I could understand.
   This matter hath been more cumbersome and more severe to me
and others that hath at sundrie times delt therin with hir
majesty, than any whatsoever since I was a counselor; the will
of God be, to bring it to some better resolucion, both for his
owne glorie and for the quiet and weale of hir majestie and hir
estate, to which ende I se my praiers must be hereafter
accommodated to God rather then advise as a counselor to hir
majestie, and yet I mind not to leave either of them as God will
geve me grace. I praie you praie my lord to excuse me for my
short writing, and my lord North for my not writing, for truelie
I am at this time overtoiled. 13=o= Maij 1586.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 269>
[} [\LETTER XCVIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 14TH MAY, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, I had hoped that your letters sent by Mr.
Atye woold have drawen her majestye to have revoked sir Thomas
Henneage, and to have stayed the motyon for the qualyficatyon of
the tytle, in respect of the alteratyon that the same is lykely
to woorke there. But nothing that can be sayd can woorke any
staye here, so resolutely is her majesty bent to have the matter
propounded to the counsell of state ther; whoe, I doe assure
myself, wyll be greatly perplexed with the motyon, and, as I
take yt, they have no awthorytye to treate uppon yt, but must
refer the consyderation therof unto an assembly of the states,
which wyll woorke sooche a busse in the peoples heades, and
mynister to the evyl-affected there sooche a plotte to woorke
on, as to mans judgement may perryll the whole cause. Ther hathe
ben as muche sayd towching the daynger as myght be alleaged. And
truly, my good lord, I am now perswaded that thys straynge
proceading growethe from her majestye selve. I have prayed this
gentleman, who is honest, to acquaynt your lordship with my
opinion herin; and so I most humbly take my leave. At the
coorte, the xiij=th=. of Maye, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
   By the coppye of Mr. Randolphes letter your lordship may see
the present state of Scoteland.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 272>
[} [\LETTER C. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 20TH MAY, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, her majestye hathe made me acquaynted
with the letter she wrytethe with her owne hande unto your
lordship, and where she chargethe your lordship with the
acquaynting the cownsell of state there with the overture of
peace made unto her by the prince of Parma as a faulte, herin
your lordship is wronged: for the fault is myne, yf any were
commytted, but, in verry trothe, she gave me commaundment to
dyrect you to acquaynt them withall, thowghe nowe she dothe
denye yt. I have receyved within thes fewe dayes many of thes
harde measures.
   Her majestie dothe, also, revoke her resolutyon towching the
sendyng over of voluntary men in sooch nomberes as doe nowe goe;
she saythe, she was content that a 1000 or 2000 shoold be
permytted to goe, but no greater nombers. Sooch as are alreadye
levyed shall, notwithstanding, be permytted to passe, but the
rest are ordred to be stayed. This chayng as I learne growethe
uppon
<P 273>
a malytyouse informatyon, that the subiectes of this realme
shoold murmore greatly at the imployement of so many people of
this realme in defence of others, to the weakening of the seyd
realme; wheras, contrarywyse, all men of judgement, lookyng into
the persons that are imployed, being for the moste parte loose
men and having nothing to take to, or into the present dearthe,
doe thinke her majestie happye to have so apt an occasyon to
imploye them in so necessary a servyce. So lyttle love is
carryed to the contynewaunce of this actyon as the weakest
argument that may be used wyll suffyce to woorke an hinderaunce
to the cause. I wyll, therfor, doe my best indevor to procure
your lordships revocatyon.
   The thre last letters your lordship sent unto me, by Browne
the messenger, I thowght good, for sundrye causes, to shewe them
unto her majestye, but espetyally to the end she myght see the
yll husbandrye used by the thresorer, and how necessary yt was,
both for her proffyt and her servyce, to have another
substytuted in his place. I fownde her disposed to geve good
eare thereunto, and thereuppon I moved her for the sendyng of
sir Valentyn Browne, for that your lordship fownde the audytor
nowe imployed there verry weake, but coold not drawe her to any
resolutyon. For, fyrst, towching sir Valentyn Browne, she
alleaged two impedymentes; the one, that she was necessarily to
use his present servyce in Ireland abowt the peoplyng of
Monster. The other, that yt woold be a matter of great charg to
have two audytors imployed there at one tyme. For the fyrst, yt
is trewe that he cannot be well spared, being, as he is, best
acquaynted with the plott for the peopling of Monster; towching
the charge, I shewed how that the benefyt she shoold reape
therby woold verry largely requyt the charge. The audytors here
be so softspryted men as I dowbt there wyll not any one be
fownde owt emongest them more suffytyent then he that is now
imployed. I fynde her majestyes dysposytyon to be sooche, as
rather than she wyll entre into an extraordynarye charge of an
hundrethe pownd
<P 274>
she can be content to be deceyved of 5000=li=. I suppose when
the thresorer shall be dysplaced your lordship wyll make choyse
of sir Thomas Shurley, whoe, I doe assure your lordship, is a
most constant affected gentleman unto you, and deservethe an
extraordinary good usage at your lordships handes.
   This daye the lord-thresorer and I dealt with her majestie
for the sendyng over of money, in sooche a proportyon as ther
may be a thorrowghe paye made, which we shewed her woold proffyt
her at the least thre thowsand pownd; but we coold no waye
prevayle, she styll standethe uppon the returne of the accompt
of the threasure last sent. Your lordship therfore shall doe
well to hasten the sending over of the same. The next threasure
that shall be sent over shall be chested under two lockes, as
your lordship advysed, to the ende you may be assured to see the
imployement thereof.
   I doe rejoyce greatly, notwithstanding the dyscowntenancyng
of your lordship every waye, that God dothe blesse your care and
travayle with most happye successe, which suerly faulethe owt so
myche the better for that your lordship hathe cause to ascrybe
the same to the goodnes of Almyghtie God, to whos protectyon I
commyt your lordship. At the coorte, the xx=th= of Maye, 1586.
   Your lordships to command,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my verie good lord the
earle of Leycester.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 275>
[} [\LETTER CI. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 20TH MAY, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, fyndinge the uncerteyn coorse helde
[{here{] towchyng thos cuntrye causes, [{and{] that her majestye
dothe rather [{wish{] to weaken then strengthen your awthorytye
there, I [{have{] dyswaded the master of Graye from his further
proceading [{in{] his preparatyon for thos cuntryes, lettyng him
playnly understand howe greatly your servyce is crossed, wherby
your lordship shall not be able to perform that good usage, both
towards himselve and sooche troopes as he shoold bryng with him,
as you desyre, for lacke of cowntenaunce and awthorytye;
[{and,{] for his better satysfactyon therein, I have sent unto
my cosyn Randolphe one of your last letters, by the which your
lordship desyreth to be revoked, wherby he may see that ther is
no cause whye your lordship shoold incorage him to imbarque
himselve in the servyce, seing you mynde yourselve to geve it
over. I have desyred sir Philip Sydney to put your lordship in
mynde to wryte somme letter of thankes to the master of Graye,
and to assure him of your good affectyon towards him.
   How hazardowsly her majestye dealethe in causes of Scotland
your lordship may perceyve both by Mr. Randolphe and the coppye
of the kinges owne letter unto hir majestye. The master of Graye
dothe assure me, that she never had so weake a partye in
Scotland as she hathe nowe. I fynde yt a verry harde matter
<P 276>
to conserve the amytye of that contrye in the coorse now held
heare, and what daynger may growe by the losse thereof, a verry
mean-wytted man may see. She greatly presumethe [{on{] fortune,
which is but a [{very{] weake foundatyon to buylde uppon. I
woold she dyd buyld and depend uppon God, and then all good men
shoold have les cause to feare any chaynge of her former good
happ.
   The myserye growethe so great in Flaunders and Brabant, as,
yf the Dunkerkers might be restrayned, yt woold owt of hande
woorke a great chaynge there. I hope the G[{...{] wyll doe more
good in one monethe, then the shyppes set owt by her majestye
hathe don all this year. Ther is daylye carryed owt of Holland
and Zelland both merchandyce and vyctualls to Calles, which
dothe greatly offende oure merchauntes here that are restrayned.
I wishe to God ther coold be some coorse taken to prevent this
mischefe of transportyng of vyctualles. And so I most humbly
take my leave. At the corte the xx=th= of Maye, 1586.
   Your lordships to commande,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my [{very good{] lord the
earl of Leycester, lord [{lieutenant-gene{]rall of hir majesties
forces in the Low Countryes.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 278>
[} [\LETTER CIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 23RD MAY, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, sythence I last wrote unto your lordship
there is nothing come to my knowledge worthye to be imparted
<P 279>
unto your lordship, and yet, having so convenient a messenger, I
woold not suffer him to passe without a fewe lynes. There is no
man here dealethe more honorably and faythefully towardes your
lordship then this bearers master, and yet, as he tould me
secreatly yesternight, he hathe ben informed that there are some
that seeke malytyowsely to [{persuade{] your lordship to
conceyve otherwyse of him. But he reposethe that confydence in
your sownd conceypt of him as yt dothe not greatly troble him.
   I begyn now to put on an opinion that the only thwartes your
lordship receyvethe growethe owt of her majestyes owne
dysposytyon, whom I doe fynde dayly more and more unapt to
imbrase any matter of weyght. And, wheras I dyd by Mr. Barker
let your lordship to understande, that I thowght you were
crossed under-hand by some great personage, I doe nowe quyte him
of yt, and am perswaded that he dealethe honestly in the cause.
   The imbassator of Denmarke departythe hence within a daye or
two. He hath ben honorably used. I doe not fynde by him that his
master is greatly inclyned to doe any thing that may offend
Spayne, or to attempt any thing in favor of the king of Navar.
By late letters from Palavicino her majestye is advertysed, that
thinges goe cowldly forwarde in Germany. By former letters from
him we were in better hope. The wyne is so weake this yeare as
yt dothe not revyve ther spirytes.
   The king of Navar is drawen towardes Rochell. And so I most
humbly take my leave. At the coorte, the xxiij=th= of Maye,
1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 281>
[} [\LETTER CV. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 26TH MAY, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, I send your lordship her encloased such
letters as I have lately receavid from the master of Gray. In
aunswer wherof, fynding hir majesty so couldly disposed still
towardes that action, I have thought good to acquaint him
directly with the change of her majesties resolution towching
the continuaunce of your authoritye, being a matter not secreat
but oppen and common, which I do tell him proceadeth thorough
the practise of ill instrumentes here, that favour the Spanish
proceedinges, and seeke to crosse your lordship, letting him
withall
<P 282>
understand, that your authoritye be[\ing\] by such meanes so
weakened as you shall not nowe be hable to yeld him that
satisfaction and good enterteynement for himself and his company
that aperteyne, you have just cause not to encourage him to come
over to the service, least, yf he should fynd any want, yt
[\might\] geve him occasion to blame your lordship, and breede
in his company a mislyke of him that had brought them to so
[\bad\] a bargayn. This aunswir in effect I have made to the
master, to whom my lord thresurer hath also written to lyke
purpose. His lordship and I have dealt earnestly with her
majesty about the matter of the masters imployement, letting her
understand how necessary yt weare that hould weare taken of his
offer, in respect of thimbarking of the king his master into the
action, which, we tould hir majesty, could not be don, unles yt
might pleas hir to mayntayne your lordships authoritye in the
title of governement geven you there, but she conceaveth still
that the matter might well enough be performid by vertue of your
authority of generall only. And so I humbly take my leave of
your lordship. At Grenwich, the xxvj=th= of May, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 286>
[} [\LETTER CVIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 3RD JUNE, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good [{lord, I think{] good by the opportunyte of
this gentleman to let your [{lordship{] understande, that I am
advartysed that the prince of Parma is determyned to attempt
somewhat agaynst Sluse, which maketh me to doubt that he hathe
some intellygence within that towne. He meanethe to commit the
executyon of the matter unto the count of Egmonde, goyernor of
Flaunders, and unto La Mota, in whom [{he{] reposethe his
chefest trust. I am greatly affrayde, unless ther shall be some
Englishmen placed there, that that towne wyll be lost. By
[{sir{] William Pelham your [{lordship{] shall understande howe
greatly yt importethe her majestye to kepe the porte townes owt
[{of{] the Spaniards handes. And so I most humbly take my leave.
At the Barnealmes, 3. June, 1586.
   Your lordships to command,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
   This gentleman hathe verry well acquited sooche favor as yt
hathe pleased your lordship to shewe him. He was verry desyrowse
to have levyed a bande of footemen, but could not performe yt
for lacke of meanes.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 306>
[} [\LETTER CXIV. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 10TH
JUNE, 1586.\] }] 
   My very good lord, though I wrote late on Wednesday at night
to your lordship, uppon Mr. Nicolas Gorge comming to me with
<P 307>
signification that he was to depart erly in the next morning,
and therfor I wrote more hastely, yet now, being lykwise moved
by Mr. Unton, the beror hereof, to know if I would have any
thyng to your lordship, who is also moved to tak shipp this
evening, with commodite of a western wynd, I am also occasioned
to wryte in lyk hast, and yet, as the tyme falleth out, if I had
mor leasur, I shuld not wryte of such matters as war mete,
because I am here at Westminster, being Fryday, and have hard
that sir Thomas Hennadg cam to hir majesty yesternight, and
that, in a generall report, I here that hir majesty is very well
contented with hym and his messadg; for which cawse, untill I
shall be at the court, which I mynd to be to morrow at nyght, I
am unfurnished what to wryte of such matters as his retorn shall
minister cause, so as, untill that tyme, I cannot so
conveniently wryte to your lordship as Mr. Hennadg and others at
the court may doe.
   But yet, my lord, I have thought good to lett you know, that
I had, by hir majestyes commandment, on Teusday last, treated
with our marchantes-adventurers to mak payment ther, on that
syde, of the some of xxx=m li=. wherby to stey the carriadg out
of monny in specie, and, about the same tyme, I did also deale
with some marchantes straungers to the same effect, that, if
they cold mak payment ther of some good somes of monny, I wold
repay the lyk here, and herof I was in good hope to have spedd,
by the manner of ther answers, so as our monnyes, namely our
aungell and xij=d=. might be ther stablished at ther just
valleus in certenty, namly, the aungell at xvj=s=. viij=d=. and
our xij=d=. at xx=d=., and so ratably other monnyes, wherof I
gave them hope, uppon report made, that your lordship was
purposed to publish a placard ther for the lyk purpooss. And to
comfort our merchantes, I did also promiss payment of the v=m
li=. presently, that was last payd ther by your lordships
request, though the same was not payable befor the last of this
month; but yesterday, both our own and the straungers cam to me,
with declaration, that, by this mishapp of Grave, they both, but
specially the straungers, cold not possibly perform that which I
required of them; and
<P 308>
so I was perplexed, and yet I so pressed our 
marchantes-adventurors as I told them, if they wold not now
strayn ther credittes to pay ther xx=m li=. within xiiij dayes,
I wold procure from hir majesty a licenss for the straungers to
carry out clothes undressed, wherby I hoped both to vent our
clothes, which is a thyng very nedefull in this tyme, and to
obteyne my request for payment of monny. By this threatning of
them they have bene styrred to mete togither, and do offer to
send awey this night a post to provide xx=m li=. to be ther
within xiiij dayes, if it be possible, and, for certenty, they
offer, that monthly they will be hable to paye x=m li=. Thus
your lordship seeth how uncerten thynges pass here, but knowyng
how great nede ther is to have monny ther, rather than ther
shuld be want any long tyme, I will press hir majesty that monny
may be sent in specie, wherof you lordship shall shortly here.
   Our marchantes do alledg another gret difficulte, in that
ther shippes can not have fre passadg to Embden by reason of the
Hollanders shippes in that ryver, wherof I have gyven them hope
that your lordship had delt therin betwixt the cont of Embden
and the Hollanders, and so I hope your lordship hath doone some
good therin, for so indede our marchantes shuld be more hable to
pay you monny from thence than at Midleburgh.
   I wish your lordship that good success that yow cold mak the
ryver of the Rhen free, as by your late takyng of the sconce in
the duke of Cleves contrey, I hope a gret furderance.
   And so now, prayeng your lordship to accept this my hasty
kynd of wrytyng in good part, I wish you success of all your
honorable actions.
   Your lordships most assuredly,
   W. Burghley.
   10 Junii, 1586.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my very good lord, the
erle of Leicester, lieutenant-generall of hir majesties forces
in the Lowe Cuntries.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 318>
[} [\LETTER CXVIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 22ND JUNE, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, I am to recommend unto your honorable
favor this bearer, my servaunt, that by your lordships good
meanes he may enioye lyke benefyt of his offyce of water-bayly
in Flusshing, as the water-baylye in Bryll dothe presently
enioye. I hope he wyll deserve any favor yt shall please you to
bestowe on him, and I shall thinke myselve greatly bownde unto
you for the same. And so I most humbly take my leave. At the
coorte, the xxij=th= of June, 1586.
   Your lordships to command,
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 318>
[} [\LETTER CXIX. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 24TH JUNE, 1586.\] }]
<P 319>
   My very good lord, yt may please your lordship to hould me
excused yf I use the hand of annother in writing unto you, being
[\at\] this present meself overburthened with other busynes. The
cause of this my dispatch is to acquainte your lordship with the
late comming of Augustin Grafigna and Bodenham from the prince
of Parma with some overture of a peace, though but in generall
termes, having only yet delyvered, that, yf the king of Spayne
can lyke to have a peace, the prince, for his part, who hath now
receaved honner enough in that countrye, will very willingly
undertake to becom an instrument and dealer in yt, for which
purpose he meaneth to send over hether some personage of quality
yf the matter go forward, but to other particularityes they
descend not. And whether the prince have any commission or
authoritye from the king to treate appeareth not. Bodenham
seemeth to have some further directions, and a letter for her
majestyes self, theffect whereof your lordship shalbe made
acquainted withall so soone as yt is knowen.
   Grafigna telleth me, that he was lodged in Cosmos lodging
when Skinck and Roger Williams gave the camisado to the campe,
and,
<P 320>
by that meanes, was prevye that the disorder and confusion was
so great as there appeared no smaule lykelyhood, that, yf they
had ben followed by their horsemen, the whole campe might have
ben overthrowen; and yet that there weare not so many slayne as
was otherwyse reported, the whole number being not above three
or fower score, and of our people betwin thirty and forty taken
and slayne, which happened for that, by reason of their longe
taryeing, they gave the prince tyme to pursue them with his
horsemen. They gave our men the prayse to have guided
thenterprise with no lesse skill and good discretion then yt was
hazardously undertaken. He telleth me, that, to shunne the
danger of Berges up Zome, he was constrayned to returne by
Mastrich, Liege, and thos quarters, where he understood that the
people had violently resistid the carriadg of the intended
provisions of vittalls to the campe, in respect of their owne
want and necessitye; by meanes wherof the prince cannot long
continue before Venloo. He understood that the merquis of
Pescara, who was looked for with 1500 horse and 3000 footmen,
bringeth now with him butan hundreth and fyfty horse and eight
hundreth footemen. The prince of Parma, as he telleth me, was
informed, that your lordship should have 18,000 fotmen and 3,000
horse, wheruppon, calling his captens to counsell, yt was, at
the first, advised to go from Ventloo and hazard the battell
with your lordship, and in thend resolved to leave some strength
before Venloo, and yet go forward with their purpose to
<P 321>
bid your lordship battell; wherof I have thought good to geve
your lordship speedy knowledge. And so I most humbly take my
leave. At Greenwich, the xxiiij=th= of Juin, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
[^THE POSTSCRIPT AUTOGRAPH^]
   The prince of Parma, in his letter to her majestye, which I
have seene, doth use the matter in sooche sortt as thowghe
sooche as have ben dealors in this peace had sowght the same at
his hands in her majesties name, which is taken most offensyvely
agaynst both the prince and the mynisters; for her highnes
protestythe, that she naver gave any sooche commyssyon. The
prince protestethe, that he hathe not any comyssyon, neyther
generally nor perticularly, to deale in the matter, and yet, yf
her majestye shall be dysposed to have the seyd peace proceaded
in, uppon knowledg in what sorte she wyll have the same
performed, he wyll be ready to further so good a worke. Your
lordship may see what effectes are wrowght by sooche weake
mynisters. They that have ben the imployers of them are ashamed
of the matter. I praye your lordship that this advertycement
towching the contents of the prynces letter may not be made
publycke.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 329>
[} [\LETTER CXXIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 30TH JUNE, 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, upon knowledge receaved from Mr. Aty here,
of a motion made by your lordship, that, in case it would please
hir majestie to write some letters to certein of the townes in
that countrey, it could not but in all lykelyhoode be a thinge
of good consequence, and very expedient for the comforting and
encouragement of the saied townes: my lord threasurer and I,
acquainting hir majestie with the mater, have founde hir very
well enclyned to yeeld therunto, as your lordship may perceyve
by the enclosed, which is a copie of the five letters that are
sent herwith, signed by hir majestie; wherin if your lordship
shall thincke good to have any thinge added or altered, or any
more letters to be
<P 330>
written to the same effect, I will not faile, upon knowledge of
your pleasure and desire herin, to procure the same to be
dispatched with expedition. And so I humbly take my leave of
your lordship. From the court at Grenewich the xxx=th= of June,
1586.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
[^THE POSTSCRIPT AUTOGRAPH^]
   The brethern of yong Mr. Kyngesmell being geven to
understande that he shold be of late taken prysonar, have
desyred me most earnestly [{to represent the same{] unto your
lordship, that by your favorable meanes his libertye may be
procured. They can be content, rather then he shoold remayn long
prysoner, to paye sume reasonable ransom. It is left to your
lordship to direct the letters as you shall thincke meete.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 337>
[} [\LETTER CXXVII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 8TH JULY, 1586.\] }]
   Yt is like you shall heare of it before this comes to you,
that we haue taken Axell, a towne in Flaunders, nere Ternous, a
forte of our side. Your sonne Philip with his bands had the
leadinge and entringe the towne, which was notably handled, for
theie caused xxx or xl to swime over the ditch, and so gett vpp
the wall and opened the gate; yet, or theie could enter half
their nombers, the souldiers were in armes, and came to resist
our men,
<P 338>
but they were overthrowen, and most of them slaine, being vj=c=,
as I heare, souldiers in that towne, beside burgers; iiij
scon[\c\]es beside are taken. The count Morrice was there, and
my lord Willoowby, and young Mr. Hatton, for his first
nuselinge. God send we may hold it, vittell is so hard to come
by there; but all is done that can be possible.
   I see wee shall starue on everie side. I here now, that there
is x=m li= sent over by exchange, and other x=m= in the middest
of August; you wrote vnto me that her majestie had appointed
xxxij=m li= to come over. It is no marvell our men runn fast
awaye. I am ashamed to write it, there was v=c= ran away in two
dayes, and a great manie to the enemye, of which sort I haue
taken sixe, and Welch is taken, that went with Pigott, where the
count Hollock and Robin Sidney overthrew a good cornett of horse
of Camilles, beside Breda, kild and tooke 28 prisoners, and
horse. This Welch was one. There is of our runagates ij=c=
brought againe from the coast-side. Divers I hanged before the
rest, and I assure you theie could haue bine content all to haue
bine hanged rather then tarry. Our old ragged roggues here hath
soe discouraged our new men as, I protest to you, theie looke
like
<P 339>
dead men. God once deliuer me well of this charge, and I will
hange to, yf I take charge of men and not be sure of better pay
a forehand. I assure you it will frett me to death or longe, to
see my souldiers in this case, and canot help them. I cry now,
peace! peace! for neuer was there such a warr, and a cause so
slenderly countenanced; but God will help vs I trust. And you
must looke to yourselues there what you will doe, you see the
yeare runns on apace.
   I will not now hold you longer; but, Mr. secretary, I tell
you, if our people shalbe noe better releiued, by the Lord, I
looke for the fowlest mutiny that euer was made, both of our men
and these countrey souldiers, and I am sure I can doe as much
with them as ever anie man could, and I doe but wonder to see
theie doe not rather kill vs all then runn away, God help vs!
And I would God you were all here one moneth, to see our
handling from ourselues. I doe assure you, if our paiments come
thus, you must looke to heare I and theie shalbe come shortly
Martin Rous and his companie, for men will not starue, and for
such monie as the states owe I look verie shortlie to haue
[\it\] . The enemie doth vse his old practice; he hath conveied
above ij=c= of our men by Callice, and I beseech cause good wait
at Dover, and Sandwish, for such as come without my pasport, and
that some example be made, or we shall never keep them here.
   I haue good hope of the count Hollock. Paul Buis, a very
knave, more and more.
   The opinion conceaued that you will leave vs will vndoe all,
and past help shortlye. Yf help doe come in sort to pull out
this late deep-rooted conceat, lett me loose life, and all I
haue in the world, yf these countries be not brought free of
this warr within one yere, and, before the Lord I speake, I doe
thinke it had bine this yere if matters had bine well followed
and supplied; but, as you deall, I knowe not what to say, nor
what councell to giue, but
<P 340>
to pray to God, and looke for ruin of all here or longe, for you
must thinke these conceats cause matters to alter more in a
weeke then heretofore in iij monthes. And yet is there life. God
be with you. In hast this 8. of July.
   Your assured.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 340>
[} [\LETTER CXXVIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 9TH JULY, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, your [{last{] letters unto her majestye
[{in{] which your lordship hathe layd before her the present
alteratyon [{in that{] cuntrye, as well in the gene[{ral{]
thorroughe the losse of Grave and Venlewe, as also in
[{certain{] partyculer persons of [{...{] cauling there, as the
count [{Maurice{] and count Hollocke, for somme knowen
respectes, hathe g[{reatly{] perplexed her, and the [{more{] for
that she gatherethe uppon the vyewe of your lordships letter,
that the only salve to cure this sore is to [{make{] herselve
propryetarye [{of{] that cuntrye, and to put [{in{] sooche an
armye into the [{same{] as may be able to make head to the
ennemyes. The[{se{] two thinges being so contrarye to her
majestyes dysposytyon, the one, for that yt breedethe a dowbt of
a perpetuall
<P 341>
war, the other, for that yt requireth an increas of charges,
dothe merveylousely dystrackt her, and make her repent that ever
she entred into the actyon.
   She hathe only made the lord-thresorer and Mr. 
vyce-chamberlyn acquaynted, as they tell me, with parte of thos
letters, and gave them order to consyder what wer fyt to be don
uppon this alteratyon. To this conference by her majestyes order
I was cauled. The resolutyon is not yet taken, but hangethe in
susspence for that the lord-thresorer, being trobled with the
gowte in his hande, canot repayre unto her. The advyce that wyll
be gyven her wyll faule owt to be this; fyrst, that she must
prosecute the actyon without respect of charges; secondaryly,
that a gentleman of sound judgement be sent over unto your
lordship, to confer with you howe bothe the generall and
pertyculer dyscontentment reygning theare may be removed, as,
also, to be informed of dyvers poynts towching the state of that
cuntrye; and, lastly, that yt shall in no sorte be fyt for her
majestye to take a[{ny{] resolutyon in the cause until sir
Francis Drakes returne, at lest untyll the successe of his vyage
be seene; wheruppon, in verry trothe, dependethe the lyfe and
deathe of the cause according to mans judgment. She is also
advysed, in the mean tyme, to make no shewe of her dyslyke, but
rather to countenaunce the cause by all owtwarde meanes she may,
which, contrarye to her naturall dysposytyon, she doth verry
well performe, [\forced thereto by mere necessytye upon the
dyscoverye of some matter of importaunce in the hyest degree
thorrowghe my traveyl and cost, CROSSED OUT\] by the which yt
apperethe unto her most playn, that, unles she had entred into
the actyon, she had ben utterly undon, and that, yf she doe not
prosecute the same, she cannot contynewe.
   I have acquaynted this gentleman with the secreat to the ende
he may imparte the same unto your lordship. [\I dare make
<P 342>
none of my servants here privy thereunto. My only feare is, that
her majestye will not use the matter with that secreacye that
apperteynethe, thowgh yt import yt as greatly as ever any thing
dyd sythence she cam to this crown, CROSSED OUT\] and suerly, yf
the matter be well handeled, yt wyll breacke the necke of all
dayngerowse practyces duryng her majestyes reygne. [\I pray your
lordship make this letter an heretyke after you have read the
same. CROSSED OUT\] I mean, whan the matter is growen to a full
ripenes, to send some confydential person unto you, to acquaynt
you fully with the matter. And so, in the mean tyme, I most
humbly take my leave. At the coorte, the ix=th= of Julye, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 342>
[} [\LETTER CXXIX. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 11TH JULY, 1586.\] }]
<P 343>
   My verry good lord, by my last [\letter\] , by sir William
Pelham, I dyd let your lordship understand what advyce I thowght
woold be gyven to her majestye, uppon the poyntes of your
lordships last letters unto her; sythence which tyme, reporte
thereof hathe ben made unto her, but she not resolved as yet,
what advyce to geve unto your lordship uppon the sayd poyntes.
She is lothe to sende a spetyall person to your lordship and the
counsell of state there, in respect of charges; and y[{et{] , in
the ende, for that the matter is of wayght, I thinke she wyll be
drawen to assent thereunto. I suppose Mr. Wolley or Mr. Wylkes
wyll be used in that servyce. She seemethe to be dysposed to
make Mr. Davyson my assystaunt in the place I serve. The
gentleman is very muche greeved with the dyslyke he
understandethe your lordship hathe of him. For my own parte, I
doe not fynde but that he hathe dealt well, bothe for the cause
and [\also\] towards your lordship, whos good opinion and favor
he dothe greatly desyre.
   The v=th= of this present captain Haggarston arryved here,
whoe departed hence the daye following.
   He had accesse unto her majestye, and was verry gratyousely
used by her. He layd before her sondrye reasons to move her to
thinke that the master of Grayes imployement in the Lowe
Contreys myght yeld more proffyt to the generall cause, and
furtheraunce to her servyce, by imbarquing the king his
soverayn, then his contynewaunce in Scotlande. But nothing that
he coold saye coold lead her majestye to be of his opinion,
being perswaded that his absence from thence may breed some
dayngerowse alteratyon in that realme. I fynde, bothe by the
master of Graye and captain Haggerston, that, without he goe in
person, he shall not be able to send over sooche nombers as your
lordship desyrethe, and, therfor, I have thowght good to staye
the sending of the 2000=li=. untyll I heare from them.
   Her majestye styll makes verry great dayntye to send over any
of her own subjects to serve, eyther as pyoners or sowldiers. My
lord-thresurer, Mr. vyce-chamberlyn and I dyd deale verry
effecttually
<P 344>
with her for the sending over of the 600 pyoners, but coold not
wyn her to assent thereunto. The pyoners provyded by Mr. Rauley
are nowe come to London and are readye to imbarque.
   Sir William Stanley, as the lord-deputye and secretary Fenton
doe advertyce me, hathe ben greatly hyndered and crossed by
dyvers malytyowse and sedytyowse brutes geven owt in that
realme, in the levye of the 1000 men, as thowgh ther were an
intent and meaning to bryng them to the butchery. Were yt not
that the deputye dothe assyst him to the uttermost of his power
he shoold not, as I am informed, be able to rayse halfe the
nombre. I hope the next westerly wynde wyll bryng him and his
troopes unto your lordship.
   What resolutyon is taken for the thresorer your lordship may
perceyve by the coppye of a letter wrytten by her majestye unto
yourself. By sir Thomas Shurley your lordship shall receyve the
originaule letter, as also sooche matters as the sayd thresurer
hathe ben charged withall, and Leyster his deputye, together
with ther awntswers. And, for that ther are certeyn espetyall
matters wherwith he standethe charged, and are by him denied, yt
is, therfor, thowght meet, that they shoold be examyned there. I
suppose he wyll himselve be a suter to be dyscharged of the
place, and the rather yf coronell Norryce returne, whos frendes
are verrye earnest for his revocatyon, in respect of the dyslyke
your lordship hathe of him. Her majestie dothe yet oppose
herselve thereunto, but I hope, in the ende, wyll be drawen to
assent, which shall not lacke any furtheraunce I can yelde, for,
being a person dyscontented, and not lyked of by the most part
of the marshall men serving there, his contynewance in that
servyce cannot but doe a great deale of harme, by maynteyning of
factyon. I wyshe also bothe his brethern here, in case he leave
the servyce, espetyally Edwarde, whoe I dowbt dothe advertyce
but hardly of the proceadinges there.
   Towchyng the 1500=li= dysbursed by your lordship in the
levyeing of the 650 horse, over and besydes the 8000=li=
alreadye receyved,
<P 345>
I doe assure your lordship that the contrybutyon of the
recusentes, and the charges, dothe not suffyce to supplye the
sayd somme of 8000=li= dysbursed by her majestye. And owr people
in this realme, by the malytyowse practyces of the yllaffected,
begyn to murmure at the warres, so as yt is thowght meet for a
tyme to staye the makyng of any newe levyes, eyther of men or
money. I doe assure your lordship there are very dangerowse
humors reygnyng here amongest us, and we not dysposed to take
sooche a pryncely coorse to kepe the yll-dysposed under, as the
present tyme requireth.
   I praye your lordship, for that her majestye dothe geve owt
that the count of Hollocks dyscontentment growethe in respect he
was removed from the coronellshipp of the footemen serving in
Zeland, and the same bestowed uppon sir Philip Sydney, that her
majestye may be satysfyed in that poynte, for that she layethe
the blame uppon sir Philip, as a thing by him ambytyowsely
sowght. I see her majestye verry apt uppon every lyght occasyon
to fynde fault with him.
   Owre treatye in Scotland was concluded the vj=th= of this
present, and the commyssyoners dysmyssed with good contentement.
Sooche advertycementes as I hav lately receyved owt of France,
Flaunders, and the ennemyes camp, I send your lordship herwith.
And so I most humbly take my leave. At Barnelms, the xj=th= of
Julye, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra: Wal.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 353>
[} [\LETTER CXXXIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 20TH JULY, 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, I understand by this gentleman, her
majesties thresorer there, that he cannot have coronnell Morgans
acquittances to be delyverid, [\as\] usually unto him by all the
captens and others that have chardg vppon receipt of their paye,
for that yt is required that a defalcacion be made out of his
enterteynement for the armour of his companyes, as hath be don
to the other captens, which the coronnell refuseth to yeld unto,
alleadging that he hathe sent backe the armour providid by the
countrye, and furnished his companyes himself. Whereuppon the
gentleman standeth chardgid with so much as the sayd paye
amounteth unto, and hath nothing to shew for the same, that may
dischardg him in his accomptes. I pray your lordship therfore to
geve order, that Mr. Morgan maye delyver unto him his
acquitaunces, as aperteyneth for his indemnitye; and, towching
the matter ytself, the armour that he hath sent backe being
refused by the country, I do not see howe he can be releevid
unles some vent maye be found for the same, or that he will come
over himself to make suite and take some order in yt. And so I
most humbly take my leave. At Richmond, the xx=th= of July,
1586.
   Your lordships to commaunde,
   Fra: Walsyngham.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my very good lord, thearle
of Leycester, lieutenant-generall of her majesties forces in the
Lowe Countryes.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 354>
[} [\LETTER CXXXIV. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 21ST
JULY, 1586.\] }]
   My verie good lord, I will first beginne to awnsweare your
[\lordships\] letter of the xviij=th= of June, which doth
conteine your advise verie circumst[{antially{] geven for my
sonne to have consideration of the matter that hath been
[{moved{] to your lordship from hence, for the change of Brill
for Harlingham, and for that [{he{] was come over thither before
the receipt of your [\lordships\] letter, I could not conferre
with him theareuppon, but if I had, by the reasons alledged in
your lordships letters, which are verie manie, I should have
counseled him to have continued in the Brill, than to have gon
so farre of as Harlingham is, being owt of the limits both of
Holland and Zeland; and the rather, also, I would have advised
him to have continued at the Brill, bicause I perceive by your
lordships letter, you can be content
<P 355>
that, with the Brill, he maie have the governement of the iland,
which maie be very commodious for him, for the strengthening of
the place; and so nowe, meaning not to trowble your lordship
with this matter, I dowbt not but he himself hath commoditye to
receive your lordships resolucion thearein, which I leave to
himselfe to accept, and conforme himselfe to your advise.
   In the postscript of your sayd letter I perceive, that by the
establishing of the chamber of finances your lordship shall be
more hable to make necessarie paimentes for all thinges
requisite under your charge then heretofore you have been, the
opinion of which lack hath most cheeflye bread dowbt in hir
majestie of the good sequel of the cawse; and therefore the
sooner your lordship maie make it appeare to hir majesty, that
the contribucions heretofore offred by the states maie be nowe
performed, which spetiallie will be best credited by hir
majestie if she maie perceive, that such sommes of monie as have
been paiable by the states to yourself for your enterteinement,
and to satisfie the debtes due to hir majestie for hir treasure
defraied to their uses, [{have been paid,{] the more resolute
shall you find hir majestie to stand fast and firme in the
prosecution of this action.
   Your lordship doth in that end of the letter, also as in
manie others, make mention of your desire to have sir William
Pelham theare, which surelie hath not been by me omitted, nor by
himself delaied, but as now he can tell your lordship, whoe I
trust hath arrived theare sum fewe daies past, in whom the lett
hath been, partlie for not yelding to the acquitall of his
debtes, and partlie, as hir majestie did often awnsweare us,
that she could not well spare such a man from the service in the
office that he hath, considering both the absence of sir Philip
Sidney, and the unhabilitye of my lord of Warwick, your brother,
to travell. But my awnswere was theareto, that, for anie
spetiall service in the field at home, in that kind of office, I
thowght, as longe as you weare well occupied in thos cuntries
against the common enemie, and might
<P 356>
prosper theare, we should not have any great neade of his
presence heare.
   Nowe, my lord, for awnsweare of sum matters conteined in your
other longe letter. Your lordship writeth, that I, in my former
letter, did sett a rate of the angell and the shillinge, the one
at xv=s= the other at xx=d=, and you did doubt wheather I ment
it to be the valewe of sterling or otherwise. But I did, and doe
still meane it, to have our angell, that is heare x=s=, to be
currant theare for xv=s= Flemishe, and our sterling shilling
that is heare xij=d=, to be theare currant for xx=d= Flemishe.
And wheare the great rose-noble was theare in estimation farre
above his valewe, and nowe is fallen out of that reputacion, I
was ever of that minde, and shall be, that newe coine in anie
cuntrie wheare knowledg is of minting, will have a higher
estimacion than his ritches will yeld him, and so I think your
lordship should have proved. The experience of him that offred
yowe so great sommes for the coinage of the rose-nobles in that
cuntrye would have tended to a fall of his great offer within
one moneth or lesse; for, trewlie, it is a natural reason in all
thinges, that (\ex nihilo nihil fit\) , and noe great gaine can
ever be made to last, but wheare the cawse and grounde of the
gaine shall last. We had heare the like experience for a while,
of an offer made by alderman Martin, to yeld to hir majestie for
the coinage of everye pownd weight of gold into rose-nobles the
sum of xxx=s=, wher otherwise was never paid above iiij=s=, for
other the best gold; and, having commission to coine the same,
he was forced to leave of within the monethe, for that the
estimacion of them did sodenlie decaie, and so the coinage
perforce did staie, and yet, for that short time, her majestye
had awnswered unto hir neare m=li= for coinage. I perceive your
lordship hath the stampes of the said rose-nobles which your
offerer had provided, and, I thinke, if the matter weare renewed
unto him againe, he could not mainteine any reason to yeld unto
your lordship anie extraordinarie proffett by coinage of them,
more then of other gold of like
<P 357>
fines, whearein I praie your lordship cawse him to be tempted
anewe, and lett me knowe his awnsweare, for if hir majestie
might have the gaine thearebie, I should be right glad thereof,
and would also further it, so as it might be sett downe to what
quantitie the coinage should be.
   And, for that I sent your lordship word of summ shillinges
coined in that cuntrie, the partie that browght them unto me
said, he had them from Amsterdam, as being coined theare; but,
as your lordship writeth, it might be at summ other towne, as
Gorcum, or such like: but this maie be held for a rule generall,
that whearesoever our monies, either gold or silver, be coined
in anie other cuntrie, if the same coines be in waight and fines
as good as ours, theare will be noe longe continuance of coinage
thereof; for the proffett of the coinage, which is the
sufferantie to the prince, is so small as [\it is\] hard for
privatt men to continue such coinage; but if, otherwise, theie
be coined of lesse valewe, then, thowgh for summ time, people
may be abused to receive them, yet such monies will not have
longe continuance in theire estimacion.
   Your lordship maketh mention of my writing that I had delt
with the merchantes-adventurers to paie ther xxx=m li=, which
indeade theie weare contented to promise, at that time when I
did write so, but, afterward, uppon the losse of Grave and
Venlo, theie semed to have had intelligence from there factors
on [{that{] side the seas, that the trade of merchandize began
to change [{and{] staie, and so theie started from theire
promise: and yet, after that, theie helped your lordship with
v=m li= which was verie happelie taken upp [{by{] your lordship,
in that it semeth, though the some weare little, the poore
soldiers weare more releved with that small portion than theie
had been with the paie of a great deale more before. And,
trewlie, if your lordship could bring it to pass, that the poore
soldiers might be paied by [\the\] poll, sometimes one monethes
paie would doe more good in that sort, than two monethes paie to
the capteine, and, in like sort, I see your lordship hath care,
that theie which shall have the disposing of the
<P 358>
treasure [\may\] be directed so to dispose it as it maie cum
trewlie and indifferentlie to the use of the soldier.
   The paiment made to the states of monie by the threasurer,
whereof your lordship maketh mencion that it was paied without
your warrant or assignment, hath been hard to be excused,
[\any\] otherwise then that the threasurer saith, he made the
warrant by the forme of another, written before by Mr. Atye,
your lordships secretarie. I am of opinion, as your lordship is,
that the states would not agree [\to\] make the rembursement of
these thinges, if your lordships warrant had not past for the
same; and one thing I find hath been greatlie forgot theare,
that, according to an article of the contract, the states
commissaries have not been made privie to our musters and
paiements, whearebie the issue will be, respondence for
repaiment to bee made [\here\]after to hir majesty. At this time
hir majestie hath appointed sir Thomas Shurleie to cum over with
the threasurer, and to be privie of all receiptes of monie that
he shall have, heare or theare, and shall joine with the
threasurer in all paimentes to be directed by your lordship, and
not otherwise, so as it shall be in your lordships power, for
this time, to see and have perfect knowledg to whome anie monie
shall be paid, and how much he shall have to paie, and, uppon
the paiments of this money now delivered to them both in charge,
the threasurer is determined to leave the place, and so I have
of long time advised him, and would have had him so to have done
heare, by ending his whole accompt [\on\] this side, but hir
majestie would have him come over to make an ende of his broken
paimentes theare, whereof, uppon his accompt heare, many dowbtes
have been made, and he left in suspence and respect almost of
xi=m li=, though he showeth divers matters for his warrantiz to
be allowed thereof, as by his peticions which at this time are
sent over thither by sir Thomas Shurleie, maie appeare: which
are of sundrie natures, for that he sheweth good warrantes for
paiment of divers sommes, but noe perfect acquittances of the
receivors,
<P 359>
though he saie theie be left theare on that side now to be
produced, and, for sum part, he sheweth acquittances of sommes
due and paied but hath not heare shewed warrantes for the same,
for the which he is to receive your lordships favour, as the
justice of the paimentes shall require.
   Your lordship maketh mention of the sending of William Herle
to Embden, from whome, at the writing of your letter, your
lordship had noe awnswere. But nowe of late I have seen, in Mr.
secretaries handes, the whole negotiation of William Herle, by
objecting and expostulating with the comte of Embden for verie
manie thinges, and of the awnsweares made thereunto; whearebie
it appearethe, that manie thinges have been spread otherwise to
his condemnacion than was trewe. But yet, I see the sequell will
be, that, although our merchantes maie have traffique thither,
yet he will keape still a newtralitie, both towardes the king of
Spayne and thos provinces, for aiding and victualing of either
of them. I wishe he might be otherwise recovered in favor of
thos states, consideringe the benefitt that might growe to thos
provinces under your government, if the river of Ems might be
kept free from the trade of the Spanishe side, whoe surelie have
great cawse to attaine to the possession of that river,
thearebie to have sum passage open to the sea, as well to have
entrance from the sea thither as to passe to the sea from
thence, the lack of which commoditye is one of the principall
impedimentes that impeacheth the king of Spaines actions.
Having, for all his great cuntries in that part of christendome,
noe commoditye to passe and repasse the seas but by Graueling,
which is not worth naming, and by Dunkirke, and Newport, which
two, in my opiniong weare of as great moment to be wonn from him
as either Gant, or Bruges, or both. And, if I knew howe to geve
counsell for such an enterprise, I would preferre it before anie
other in this time, for I doe conclude that the king of Spaine
never can be a full master of thos cuntries without he have sum
owt-gate and in-gate by the sea. And, whilest I am writing thus,
I praie your lordship thinke
<P 360>
howe such service might be done by your maritime forces and
flie-boates theare, that are fittest to impeche thos kind of
havens. Thus having been longe in trowbling your lordship,
withowt anie great matter of substaunce, but uppon conclusions
taken by perusing your lordships letters, and nowe, considering
what thinges have hapned since the writinge of your letters, I
will breefly make sum mention of thinges latelie passed.
   By sum late letters written from your lordship to hir
majestie, and by sum conference had with Coxe, whoe browght the
same letters, hir majestye hath had sondrie ernest consultacions
with Mr. vice-chamberlaine, Mr. secretarie, and me, uppon divers
thinges contained in your lordships letters, and for that hir
majestie perceiveth you are verie desirous to be advised and
directed by hir for your governement in that place, which is
accompanied with manie great difficulties at this time,
thearefore, after longe debate had before hir majestie, it was
thowght most necessarie to send one spetiallie from hir majestie
unto your lordship, having named two or three, but in the ende,
hir majesty made choise of Mr. Wilkes, the bearer of thes my
letters, whoe is instructed, not onelie by sum writings, as
memorialls, delivered unto him, but, also, by longe speches of
hir majestie hirself, which she hath recorded in hir owne
tables, and nevertheles caused him to putt the same more at
length in writing, so that he commeth verie well informed of hir
majesties mind, and appointed also to be informed by your
lordship of manie necessarie thinges for satisfaction of hir
majestie. And, besides thes, he hath letters from hir majestie
for assuraunce of hir constant persisting in this common action,
and, bicause your lordship shall at length understand by himself
the matters committed to his charge, I doe thearefore forbeare
to make any further mention thereof.
   At the writinge hereof sir William Stanley was come hither,
and meaneth with hast to repaire to your lordship, judging that
his men are before this time at Flushing.
   Mr. secretarie, I thinke, doth advertise you of the dowbtfull
estate of the affaires in Fraunce, altogether in great
calamitie.
<P 361>
And, which is most of us to be dowbted and feared, by the long
delaie of the armie to cum owt of Almaign, we maie dowbt that
the king of Navarre will yeld to sum peace not profitable for
the religion, but yet unprofitable for the Frenche king, for
that the duke of Guise and all his partye, by sum mediation of
the duke of Nevers and Montmorency, offer great frendshipp to
the king of Navarre, meaning to seperatt themselves both from
depending uppon the Frenche king or his mother, against whome
the duke of Guise professeth open hatred, as thinking himself
also secretlie hated by the king. And so, by thes strange
accidentes, it cannot be but France must suffer great
calamities, and so as the poore flock of Christ might be safe,
whilest thes great bulls of Bazan shall rage one against the
other, I care not for the rest that maie followe to that wicked
nation.
[^THE REST OF THE LETTER AUTOGRAPH, WITH THE EXCEPTION OF THE
ADDRESS^]
   I understand by Mr. secretory, that the master of Gray in
Scotland contynueth his purposs to send forces out of Scotland
to your lordship, and myndeth to come unto England first hyther.
But I dout how he shall be helped with that mony that I had
purpoossly stayd, being ij=m li= for hym, for that, as Mr.
Shyrley can tell your lordship, hir majesty was grevoussly
offended with me for steying of it; and, even this daye, I moved
hir majesty ageyn, that it might be stayd, or otherwise the
master of Gray shuld be disapoynted therof, but in no wise she
wold yeld, as Mr. secretary can advertise your lordship.
   And so, with a good hart and yet an evill head, I am forced
to end, besechyng God to prosper yow, and enhable yow to hold
the feld, but I wish not that yow shuld hazard any fight, for,
as your case is, a small loss may be a gretar to yow than the
lyk to the ennemy. From Rychmont, the 21. of July, 1586.
   Your lordships most assuredly,
   W. Burghley.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my verie good lord, the
erle of Leicester, lieutennant-generall for hir majesties
forces, and governor of the provinces united.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 382>
[} [\LETTER CXXXVIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 30TH JULY, 1586.\] }]
   My verie good lord, whereas my servant Brune hath, since sir
John Norryces departure last out of this realme, employed
himself in victualling a great part of hir majesties forces in
the Lowe Countries, and for that purpose hath been at great
charges, as hee advertiseth me, in erectinge bruehouses and
bakehowses, whereby the souldier is much better served,
especiallye in drincke and bread, than otherwise hee would bee,
so it is, that I am enformed, there bee some whiche intend to
sue to your lordship for a commyssion to authorize them
speciallye to serve in those victualling causes, whereby my sayd
servant is lyke to bee undone. Wherefore, as before I have
recommended my servant to your lordship, so I humblye praye you
to continewe your honorable favour in suche sort towardes him as
he maye not bee forbidden, but permitted still to vittall the
souldiers as hee hath done; for whiche I shall thincke myself
beehoulding to your lordship, and so I humblye take my leave.
From the court, the xxx=th= of Julye, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund.
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 395>
[} [\LETTER CXLIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 15TH AUGUST, 1586.\] }]
<P 396>
   My very good lord, by thincloased from the master of 
[{Gray{] , your lordship maye perceave howe much yt doth importe
her majestyes [{service{] and his own credit, that the intended
imployment of hym in the Lowe Countryes do take place, the
consideracion whereof hath now movid hir majesty to geve hir
resolut consent therunto, for that she seeth thinconveniences
that are otherwise lykely to grow, yf she do not imploy him, and
judgeth very necessary for her owne behoof to have his credit in
Scotland and devotyon towardes her mayntayned and continued, and
therfor your lordship shall do a thing very acceptable to hir
majesty, to have a spetyall care that he may fynd [{...{] of
enterteynement, and receave that welcom and good [{...{] both
for himself and those that accompanye him, that may satisfye his
expectation and encourag him in his good disposicion. I have
also movid hir majesty for an advance for him of the two
thowsand poundes that he desyreth, [{which she is{] content to
graunt a warraunt unto my lord-threasurer to disburse the same
out of the next treasure that shalbe yssued for them ther, to be
repayd agayn unto your lordship by the states, and [{...{] shall
the somme be notwithstanding presentlye furnished to serve the
masters present and necessary turne, as he desireth; and so I
humbly take my leave of your lordship. At Barnelmes, xv=th= of
August, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 396>
[} [\LETTER CXLIV. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEICESTER. 18TH
AUGUST, 1586.\] }]
<P 397>
   My very good lord, I have forborn to wryte to your lordship
of any thyng sence Mr. Wylkes depeche, and sir Thomas Shyrley
with Mr. Hudleston, and so contynued in expectation of some
matter from that syde uppon their arryvall, and so we here did
thynk the lack of hearyng from thence cam by contynvance of
contrary wynds, and yet nevertheless yesterday cam, [\in\] on
instant, two from your lordship, Mr. Haydon and Mr. Killigrew,
and by Mr. Haydon I receaved your lordships letters of the
29=th= of July from the Hage, which war wrytten befor the
arryvall of Mr. Wilkes and sir Thomas Shyrley, so as by those
your lordships letters I cold not understand any thyng in answer
to matters committed to ther severall charges, but yet by a
lettre of the 6. of August from sir Thomas Shyrley at Tyrgowss,
I perceaved that he had spoken with your lordship, and at that
tyme he had understandyng that the prince of Parma was not at
Antwerp, as before was reported, but that he was gon to besege
Berk, and that, as he thought, your lordship would prepare
yourself to follow with an army. And whan I consider your
letter, how difficultly you bryng the states and the contrye to
yeld to yow monny, accordyng to their manny promises, for
mayntenance of so great an important service, tendyng to
preserve themselves out of the Spanish bondage, I do truly
lament your case, to be so wrapped into the cause as for hir
majesties securety you may not leave it soddenly, nor yet
without more redy helpe of monny can prosequut the action with
that lyff as it ought to be. And no on thyng doth more hynder
hir majesties forwardnes than an old rooted opinion that she
hath, that all this warr will be torned uppon hir chardg, by the
backwardnes in payement by the states, ageynst which I did
allweys oppose in answeryng to comfort hir majesty, that I was
assured, so as she wold contynew redy payement for hir nombres
accorded, yow wold not fayle but recover such somes from the
states, monthly, as they had promised your lordship shortly
uppon the committyng of the government to your lordship; and so
suerly I contynued my hope, although, in truth,
<P 398>
manny privat persons did advertise it very dowtfull, and so I am
sorry to se it, as I do by your own letters, very difficult to
be gotten. And yet I will not leave my hope, consideryng I
presume your lordship will look into [\the\] impedimentes, which
I thynk ar not the lack of good will in the people to yeld the
aydes promised, but in the maliciouss covetoosness of such as ar
knytt and confederat with the states, who, I thynk, fynding ther
lack of ther former gaynes, wold, if they cold, attayn to ther
government ageyn, and for that purpooss seke to stopp the
payment, therby to weary your lordship, and to induce yow to
remitt the government, which suerly cannot be doon but with the
ruyn of the whole cause, to the gretest daunger of hir majesties
suerty.
   Your lordship hath don very honorably and proffitably to our
country in procuryng oppen passadg for our marchantes to Embden,
and yet, in the end of your lordships letter, your lordship
wryteth that the ambassador for Embden will not assent to the
matter, except the ryver may be fre for all other marchantes
besyde English, but, I thynk, if it be well stycked unto, the
conte of Embden will, [\for\] his own proffitt, consent to our
merchantes access, though others shuld not come but by
permission of the Hollanders. Suerly if ther might be passadge
oppen by the Rhen out of Holland, I wold less care for our trade
at Embden, for than our merchantes saye they wold make a great
trade by Holland, but yet, with the condition that our
marchandise be not burthened with great taxes, for your lordship
knoweth that nothyng is so great a hyndrance to trade of
merchantes as new toles and impositions, wherof our staplers of
late complayned for the burden layd uppon ther wares at
Midleborough. And yet, I confess, it is hard to gyve advise
herin, for as resort of merchauntes to those countreys is
proffitable, so how the common cause that is maynteaned by taxes
may yeld a forbearance of taxes uppon marchandise, I gretly
dout.
   I thynk by the accompt of Englishmen of late monthes past out
of this realme, ther ar besyde the queenes own army, above
<P 399>
vj=m= footemen, so as, if your lordship may have wherwith to pay
them, I would think your lordship shuld be hable so to kepe the
feld as the prince of Parma shuld not be hable to contynew any
sege to any town of strength, being also well-manned. And
suerly, my lord, without yow shall be hable to kepe the feld,
ther is no town so strong but the prynce with his battery will
wyn it.
   I am very glad that the town of Axell serveth to so good a
purpooss. I am suer, if the prynce did not follow theise seges
in Gelderland, &c. your lordship wold advance some horssmen to
Sluse and Ostend to spoyle the countreys about Bruuges and Gant,
which also wold make them revolt. Now, my lord, I dowt not but
Mr. secretory doth at lardg acqueynt yow with the discovery of
the late traytorooss conspyracies, the authors wherof, as farr
furth as we do esteme, we have, savyng only ij, Thomas Salisbury
and Edward Abyndon, both which ar fled, but pursued. My
lord-chancellor and I ar here contynuyng at London, dayly
occupyed, first in procuryng ther apprehension, and now in
examyning, &c.
   And so, my good lord, being urged with a weak gouty righthand
to leave wryting, I pray your lordship to accept these lynes, so
evill scribled, in good part.
   Your lordships most assured,
   W. Burghley.
From my houss at Strond, 18 Aug. 1586.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 403>
[} [\LETTER CXLVI. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 2ND SEPTEMBER, 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, this gentleman hathe verry carefully and
dyscretely executed the charge commytted unto him. In what good
termes your lordship standethe with her majestie he can shewe
you, I praye God contynewe yt, and that she may dyscerne the
yll-affected from the sownde.
   Sorrye I am to see your lordship trobled with the pertyculer
quarrels of thos that ought to be best united. The Lord geve you
wysdome to appeese them, and patyence to beare this crosse!
   The lord-treasurer hathe promysed to ioyne with me in the
<P 404>
revokyng of sir Ihon Norryce. I have imparted unto this bearer
what is intended agaynst the Scottish queen. He is commanded to
departe with speed, and my leysure wyll afoorde no more lynes,
and therfore I most humbly take my leave. London, 2. September,
1586.
   Your lordships to command,
   Fra: Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 404>
[} [\LETTER CXLVII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. SEPTEMBER 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, [{...{] can wytnesse unto you [{how{]
greatly I was busyed at the tyme of his departure in the
dyscoverye of the complyces of the late conspiracye, wherof I
praye God her majestye may make [{more{] proffyt then of lyke
opportunytyes thorrowghe Gods godnes appered unto h[{er{] . I
knowe your lordships good advyce can greatly further the matter.
She dyd never make greater [{speech{] of her love towardes you,
[{or{] of the trust she reposethe [{in{] you then at this
present; therfor your lordships good cownecell will work good
effects.
   Your last sent by young [{Gor{]ge of the vij=th= of this
present
<P 405>
I think meete to be communicated unto her majestye, that she may
see howe hardely she dealethe with her best-affected servaunts.
   I am very glad that your lordship is growen to so good a
lykyng of my cosyn Jhon Norryce. I praye God he may styll carrye
himself towardes your lordship in sooche [{sort{] as may
increase your good opynion conceyved of him.
   I have not been unmyndfull of your lordships request both for
Danyell Rogers and your servant Bodley. Poor Rogers is forced to
staye here to sollycyt the contrybution of the bishops towardes
his ransom, which he fyndethe himselve bound in conscyence to
see awntswered to sooche as became bounde for the same. I fynde
the man well bent to serve your lordship yf this impedyment were
not. Touching your servant Bodley, he hathe been owt of the
towne a long whyle but is dayly looked for, at whos returne I
will not fayle to deale with him.
   Touchyng her majestyes goodnes to be exstende towards the
elector Truxies I wyll not fayle to sollycyt, thowghe [{with{]
no great hoape thereof. And so I most humbly. [\NO CONCLUSION OR
DATE\]

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 405>
[} [\LETTER CXLVIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 4TH SEPTEMBER, 1586.\] }]
<P 406>
   Good Mr. secretary, remember Seburo, my honour and creditt
lieth vppon it.
   The manner of our proceeding Mr. Gorge shall tell you, from
our first going fourth of this iourney till he departed after
the wyning of Dorsborge, which was happilie gotten, being so
well walled and double ditched as it was, for the prince was
come as farr as Eltons with his forces to reskew it, but he came
to late, for the same day we had it. Hit is the first towne wonn
by the cannon for the states these ix yeres, and it is a towne
as fitt for vs as can be, for Zutphin can now little harme vs,
for it is environed of
<P 407>
euerye side; Deventer and othir townes beneth it, and this towne
and Arnham aboue it, all vppon one river.
   The marshall, I thanke God, mends verie well, and shall carye
a bullett in his bellie as long as he liues. God hath
wonderfully delt for his saving aliue, and I escaped well, I
thanke Him, the same instant. For saving me he had it, as I
wrote vnto you, for I first spied the wall to be verie nere, and
he found he was past his marke, and stept before me, at which
verie stepp he receaued the blow, which perhapps had lighted
more daingerous vppon me, being higher then he, but God can
defend whoe he will.
   Roger Williams hath gott a blow thorow the arme, one evil
fire. I warned him of it, being in trench with me, and would
need run vpp and downe so oft out of the trench, with a great
plume of feathers in his gylt morion, as so many shott coming at
him he could hardlie escape with soe little hurt. He saw ther
was [{some went out{] of my trench to gaze and were strait hit,
and on kild out-right, that were [{n{]euer such marks as he was,
and within point-blanke of a caliver. God be thanked, all things
considered, that we lost noe more. I thinke there is not xij
kild since we came before the towne, and I beleeue never men
lodged so nere a towne the first day as we did, and began our
trench the first night, which had like to haue bine costly to
some. We attend here looking for the enemie, but our stay is to
strengthen the towne better, or I departe.
   This day I received letters from the count Newenor who is
with the rutters, and tells me theie will march further with all
[\speed\] . He sends me worde that old Ramelius was sent vnto
him by the kinge of Denmarke, to will the count to send me word,
that, if the rutters stay, or vse delay, that he will furnish
him with ij=m= of his best horse and iij=m= footmen, and shalbe
with him within xv dayes; and that her majestie had sent vnto
him that he should help me if there were occasion, and her
majestie should see he
<P 408>
was at her comandement. Though the yere be to far past now to
levy those countrei horsmen, yet her majestie may see that
kinges good devotion, which I pray you, sir, to remember to her
majestie, that the kinge maie receaue thanks, and to keepe him
in [\t\]his mind still; for, if her majestie doe goe forward
with this cause, than his offer will serue well against the
springe, for, noe doubts, against that time, the kinge of Spaine
will sett vpp his rest; and truly, but for this armie of her
majesties, at this time, now, the prince had prevailed this
yere, to the verie townes of Holland. All these parts, Gelders,
Overisell, the Vellow, Vtrickt, and Freseland, had bine gone
cleane or this day, and for all the men that came over so fast,
I doe assure you at Elten, our last campe, we had not 4,500
English footmen, nor xiij=c= horse, English, Duch, and all, nor
aboue 1,100 Scotts and Duch foote. All which [\is\] a small army
to defend such an enemie, as is at the lest at this howre 3,000
horse, and 8,000 footmen, if not 10,000. Neuerthelesse, I trust
not only to keepe all these parts safe, but, if our rutters come
in time, make him seeke a new coast to dwell in. In the meane
time, I am glad as he got ij townes of ours by reason, we haue
gotten ij of his by force, and honorably, and, vppon my word,
the states will not change these ij for iiij such as thother,
theie be so fitt to annoy the enemie, as you will not beleeue
the hurt Axell hath done him, and now we haue this towne,
Zutphin wilbe nothing, considering how it shalbe beseiged by
Deventer and this towne. We haue the whole river of Isell save
Zuttphin, and the prince must now gett him another place for
provion then Cullen, for Cassamer hath forbidden anie vittell to
passe his countrey, either to Cullen or that waye. Soe that
Cullen beginns to growe weary of the prince, and so doth the
duke of Cleave, albeit he and his sonne hath giuen him all the
help theie can, as well in deliuering vpp their towne to him, as
euerie [\way\] ells, but he will double smart for it, the
rutters once being come.
<P 409>
   I receaued a letter from sir Edward Stafford, wherin he doth
giue me warning of one Caesar, an Italian, that is gon into
England, and doth meane to come over to me for some myschief. By
his description it should be a surgion, for their were ij
Italians, both surgions, and both their names Caesars, and be
both of Rome, and very villaines, yet found theie great fauor of
me in England. Yf it be either of them, as he sayth this man
confessed he serued me, it were not amisse he [\and\] his
companion were staid there, or ells, if theie desire earnistly
to come over to me, give me warninge and write your letters by
them to me, and then I will handle them well enough here; in the
meane time, if theie linger there, for feare of her majestie
clapp them vpp, for she is their principall mark.
   I trust, after Wilks be come home, I shall heare of her
majesties resolucion. If she leaue of her hold that is offerd,
all is gon; and except she take vppon her all, all wilbe gon,
and that shortly. For my none parte, I trust not to leaue anie
dishonour behind me for her majestie; and except she take the
cause princly in hand, and call her parliament, and accept that
hir subiects will offer her to maintayne this charge, hit will
but consume her treasor and loose the countries. Yet better were
it to make some secret confederacye first with Denmark, and, if
I knew her pleasure onlie, I could deall by the count Hollock
with the king of Denmark, quickly to knowe his mind. High time
it is that her majestie did resolue one way or other, for our
states growe stately, and wilbe high or low as God shall dispose
of this iourney, for theie yet feare her majesties acceptacion
further, and hir continuance with this charge doubtfull. Theie
be iumbling vnderhand, I dowbt. Theie doe send to hir majestie,
as Wilks can tell you, touchinge this point. Menyn and Walke be
appointed; Valk is a shrewd fellowe and a fine; Menyn is the
deper man indeed, and I thinke the honester, and being well vsed
the ablest man of all the states to serue her. He hath great
credit as anie one man.
<P 410>
Lett him be inwardly vsed; and he is but poore, which you must
consider, but with great secrecy. Thus far you well; in hast,
this 4th September.
   Your assured freind.
   I doubt not but her majestie will shewe my letter touching
these causes.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 411>
[} [\LETTER CL. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 15TH
SEPTEMBER, 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, Mr. Wylkes is come wherby hir majesty
falleth into consideration of the state of those countryes,
which suerly requireth no small consultation, the lett wherof
is, at this tyme, more than is convenient, that we of the
counsell ar throghly
<P 412>
occupyed, some at London, some here, and some abrode, to deale
partly in tryall of traytors, in serching for more, in lookyng
to the sea-costes, to withstand the landyng of certen Spanish
shippes of warr which ar come to Brest, but as yet we know not
to what end. Some thynk they cam to have bene in redynes to have
landed in ayde of this late conspyracy intended, some to joyn
with the French in the recovery of Rochell. Within a few dayes
we shall se what they meane.
   I understood your lordship did favorably stey, amongst
others, my son from goyng to the assault of Dewsborogh. I do
thank your lordship therfor, although I can be content that both
he and I shuld spend our lyves for the queen and our countrye,
but I wish it in a matter of more moment; and yet I judg the
wyning of the town very necessary as the tyme was, but most of
all if therby Zutphan might be gotten, which I thynk must be by
perill of famyn.
   The queen of Scottes is lykly to come to Fodryngham castell
the 27. hereof, and I thynk a nombre of the counsellors and
others of the nobilitie shall have commission, accordyng to the
late statute 27=o=, to heare and judg hir cause ther, so as in
the next parlement, to begyn uppon a new summons the xv. of
October, further order may be taken with that queen accordyng to
part of hir desertes. Your lordship and I war very great motes
in the traytors eies, for your lordship ther, and I here, shuld
first, abowt on tyme, have bene killed; of your lordship they
thought rather of poysoning than slayeng. After us ij gon, they
purposed hir majesties deth, but God our defendor hath
graciously prevented ther mallyce, and I hope will contynew his
favor to mak voyd the relliques of ther mallyce.
   I will not fayle but remembre your lordships sute for the
forfayted
<P 413>
less of Salisbury at Denbigh, being the land [\of\] your
lordship.
   I can wryte no more at this tyme, wishyng to heare some
comfortable news of Berk, ether of fredom from the sege or
resonable composition for our people ther.
   From Wyndsor, xvth of September, 1586.
   Your lordships most assuredly,
   W. Burghley.
   Seaburo, the Spanyard, hath bene redy this month to be sent
to your lordship, and so I told Mr. Dudley iij wekes past.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 418>
[} [\LETTER CLIII. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO LORD BURGHLEY. 29TH
SEPTEMBER, 1586.\] }]
   My lord, I wrote to you before of certain commissionours
appointed to be sent to her majestie by the estates: who nowe I
thinke wilbe very shortly with you. One cause of their comming
wilbe, to advertise her majestie of their estate, and to be
humble suytours to knowe her highness pleasure for the
continewaunce of her gracious favour to them. But withall, a
spetiall cause of their message wilbe, to borrow of her majestie
a furder somme of monye, wherein I can saye litle. But according
as her majestie shall lyke of the proceading with the cause, so
must the advise be. And I do wishe, yf her majestie mynde to
deale furder in this cause, and do thincke the maintenance of it
to concerne the savetye of her own estate and realme, as it
hathe bene allwayes so thought hitherto, that then bothe some
loane of monye in this necessitye and all other effectuall
courses were taken that may best furder the same. As,
principallye, a parliament to be called, and that her highness
do use the good willes of her subjectes to a francke
contribution therto, to the which I nothing doubt but they wilbe
founde moste agreeable and willinge. And no doubtes the case was
never so good to deale in as nowe, and, as I trust you shall
furder perceyve, yf other mayntenaunce fayle not nowe, being in
good estate. But to goe on in suche sorte as it hathe hitherto
<P 419>
bene proceaded in, is to lose all that is and shalbe spent, and,
by litle and litle, to undoe the whole countrye, which the wise
here see, and surely will do what they can to prevent in tyme,
and it must neades be daungerous to her majesties estate, to
lett it be thus weakelye dealt in on bothe sydes. For my own
parte, I will not endure suche another yeares service, with so
many crosses and wantes, and so litle asistaunce every waye, yf
I were sure to gayne as muche as all these provinces are worthe.
I hope God will put into her majesties and your lordships
myndes, to do that which shalbe moste for his glorye, for the
savety of her majestie, and benefite of her realme. And so,
desirous to know with all spede some piece of her majesties
resolucion, being hye tyme, I myselfe wilbe moste readye to
performe the parte of a most duetifull servant, and obey all her
commandementes. And so, with my right hartye commendacions, I do
bid your good lordship farewell. At the campe before Zutphen,
the 29=th= of September, 1586.
   Your lordships very loving frende,
   R. Leycester.
   To the right honourable my very good lord, the lord
high-treasourour of Englande.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 420>
[} [\LETTER CLV. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 1ST
OCTOBER, 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, uppon this bearers [{...{] Killygrews
sodden departure, I cannot wryte so much as I wold; nether if he
had lesur to tarry, cold I at this present wryte to myn own
satisfaction. I dout not but Mr. Cavendish, whom I fynd a most
ernest devoted creatur to your lordship, will, havyng lesur,
wryt at length how he fyndeth her majesty disposed. For the
commen causes ther under your government, Mr. Wylkes is to come
from hence within these few dayes, instructed from hir majesty.
   For the gretest matter here in hand, we fynd the cause so
manifest ageynst the party, the party so daungerous to our
quene, our countrye, and, that is of most importance, to the
whole cause of Godes chirch thrugh christendom, as without a
direct and spedy
<P 421>
procedyng it had bene less daunger to have concealed then
revealed this gret conspyracy. I hope that God, which hath gyven
us the light to discover it, woll also give asistance to punish
it, for it was intended not only ageynst hir majesties person,
and yours, and myne, but utterly to have overthrown the glory of
Christes chirch, and to have erected the synagog of Antychrist.
I nede not to debate this argument.
   My lord, for a particular plesur, I thank you for licensyng
[{my son{] to come home, for suerly otherwise his carcass had
never bene brought alyve hyther; he is yet, by the opinion of
the physicians, not out of perrill, his ageu still contynuing
uppon hym.
   And so, my lord, forbearyng untill Mr. Wylkes coming, I take
my leave of your good lordship, whom I wish so to end your
jornay in the feldes, as you may retorn hyther without daunger
to the commen cause ther, a thyng so nedefull, as suerly,
without your presence here, I know not how hir majesty will or
can resolve uppon hir manner of procedyng. From Wyndsor castle,
the first of October, 1586.
   Your lordships most assured,
   W. Burghley.
   I hope well that Cassimyre shall enter into France.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To the right honorable my very good lord the erle
of Lecestre lieutenant-generall for the queens majesty of
England in the Low Countryes.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 421>
[} [\LETTER CLVI. THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY
WALSYNGHAM. 2ND OCTOBER, 1586.\] }]
<P 422>
   Good Mr. secretary, I trust now you shall have longer
enioying of your sonne, for all the worst days be past, as both
surgeons and phisytians have informyd me, and he amends as well
as ys possible in this tyme, and himselfe fyndes yt, for he
slepes and restes well, and hath a good stomack to eate, without
feare, or any distemper at all. I thank God for yt.
   Ther be certen personns desired to be sent to hir majesty,
one of the states, which ys Mening, another of the councell,
which ys Valk. I have thought good to have Mr. doctor Clerk goe
also, who wyll deall truly with hir majesty, and he hath byn a
dilligent observer of all that hath past among them.
   But I haue thought yt good for spetyall causes to send one
Burgrave, and joyned him with the other, who of my knoledge ys a
wyse, honest, and religious personn, and not one now amonge them
that ys of better understanding of all the matters of this state
than he ys, and whatsoever he doth know he wyll deall plainly
with hir majesty, whome I pray you help he may haue conference
with hir, and with you. You shall fynd him a substanciall wyse
man. He was, in the princes tyme, one of the chife for Flanders;
he hath byn also one of the prevey councell of estate, and used
almost in all ther great causes. Since my coming he served first
as master of requestes, after audyencer, and first secretary of
the councell of estate. He ys born in Flaunders, and therefore
those of Holland have byn lothe to lett him groe into to
<P 423>
much credytt. Paul Buys could never lyke of this man, as one
afrayd of him, for he ys a depe fellow; yet wold this man never
speak yll of him to hurt him, and yet no man can tell more of
his doinges than this man, and he can tell you whether I dyd use
Paul Buis, and deservyd well at his handes, or no. This man I
recomend to you, as one best able to satysfye you what courses
may be best to procede for the present, yf hir majesty doe meane
to deall any further in these causes, but, except you think the
cause worthye to be taken thorowly and princely in hand, never
pach it upp any more; rather take your owne courses betyme, and
leave these to God, than to deall so as nether part shalbe the
better; for most faythfully I assure you, the fear among
themselves, with the dowbt of hir majesties proceding, hath
almost mard the fashyon of this actyon. And yet, what hart and
contentacion the shew of hir majesties favor to these countreys
hath bredd doth appeare by the king of Denmarkes and other
princes furtherance hereof. And, no doubtes, yf hir majesty wyll
goe to the chardge but for ij yeres, she may as assuredly
stablysh these countreys as she shall please, as yf ther
[\were\] no enymye able to gaynsay yt.
   Now, whether you ther conceave styll as you have done, that
these countreys be of consequence for hir majesties safty and
servyce, to be kept at hir devotyon, I must leave to yourselves;
but yf you be, than doth now your opportunytye well serve you,
both to move hir majestye and to ease hir own charges. Yf that
opinione be changed, then ether must you entertein them with
hope, tyll you can know whether Denmark wyll deall or no, or to
make a good peace or a bad peace for hir and them. And, albeyt I
wyll never councell that way which may bring but a present shew
of peace for a tyme than a perfect peace in dede, yet yf others
shall think and perswade that way as a necessarye way, than I
say, I think hir majesty may have what peace she will at the
king of Spains handes nowe. For the prince ys at his wyttes end
at thys time, and a sounde and princely preparacion made for hym
this wynter wold breake his backe the next yere, using such
other meanes as hir majesty may with the king of Denmarke and
the
<P 424>
princes of Germany, with whome she may have the greatest
reputacion of any prince in the world.
   These thinges I must leave, as he that must be dyrected; and
yf hir majesty doe procede with these men in the cause, you must
nedes than have another manner of comission than was last, and
otherwyse delt withall, both for hir majesties assurance here
and a more fyrme establyshment of the government; and as these
men, all but Burgrave, are sent not only for to seke relyfe, but
chyfely to dyscover and understand hir majesties very full
dysposytion in this cause, so ys hir majesty to consider with
herself what she wyll doe, that she may use them accordinglye.
   Of those ij, Mening and Valk, Meninge ys the abler man every
way, and I think the better affected to hir majesty. I dyd gyve
him a cheyn, one of those you sent; he was no lytle proud man to
think himselfe remembered of hir majesty. For my owne parte, my
credytt hath byn craked ever synce hir majesty sent sir Thomas
Henege hether, as all men can tell you, for indede the
government they semed they had geven from themselves to me stok
in ther stomackes always, and but to have pleased hir majesty
and satysfie the people, they wold never have donn yt. On the
other syde, the towens and people they never could, nor yet can,
well consent to be overuled by their bakers, and bruers, and
hired advocattes, having byn always governed under some prince,
and now spetyally under hir majesty, for so dyd they, and doe
the most parte, yet take it, that they be only under hir
majesties goverment and not the states, for, lett me never be
trusted, yf, as sone as they shall finde that they be not under
her majestyes government, that they doe not refuse to obey the
states, or to lyve under the name of ther goverment iij monthes.
I know they hate them, and therin Paul Buys sought to wynn his
credytt wyth the people ageyn, to make that shew he dyd, as
indede he dyd above all other men here, to advance hir majesties
goverment, by joyning with them to press yt so uppon me, as,
unless that werr donn, they wold have no goverment by the states
by no meanes. Of this you hard inough, but I never found yt was
well conceavyd yet, for your owne
<P 425>
authoryty from Englond was such as gave them all good cause both
to thinke hir majesty ment yt, and for them to offer yt, and
confyrm yt uppon me.
   Touching all these matters for these countres, I wyll referr
you to Mr. Burgrave. I pray you make much of him, for he ys very
religious indede, and so ar not many here. Mening ys therin
better than his fellow, and one you may deall withall frely, but
yet you know he ys one of the states. Valk is subtyll, and
seketh wholy to content the states ever synce my authorytye cam
in questyon, for, before they hard of hir majesties myslyke,
they all of the councell werr sworn to me as governour. After
Mr. Henege cam, they all secretly sought to the states, and
tooke new patentes from them, saving ij, who plainly answered
that they wer sworn to me as governour over all the provinces,
and they wold no other patentes from any boddy.
   The states have challenged those of Utryckt, also, for that
they have contynewed themselves only obedyent to my authoryty,
refusing any other comandment of ther states-generall; and
herein did Paul Buys deall most badly with me, and with hir
majesty also, that knowing hir good pleasure, after did always
seke to make wrangling and debates among us, yet did I never any
thing but by his advice, and used him above all other
councellors here. I hear yt ys reportyd that he gave upp all
offyces in the princes tyme for standing against Monsieur and
for hir majesty, and how trew that ys all men here know, and
that he had a course than in hand, nether for Monsieur nor hir
majesty, but only for these countreys for the prince himselfe;
and whan he was dedd wold have had him buryed as erll of Holland
and Zeland, and wrought all the states of the countrey in the
heyt of yt to chuse his sonne governor, which being delayed, he,
being in England, was the chife cause to hasten the confyrmacion
of yt, and was donn indede, as you know, and none semed to
myslyke yt so much as he, and yet he chifely procured yt. His
reason than was, for that he feared hir majesty wold not goe
forward, and than he ment to prevent all other practyces for
<P 426>
the French; and yet whan I cam he only sought to make a pyke
between count Morris and me, and byd me take hede of him for he
was only French. Indede I here that after the prince was ded,
and [\he\] saw that his practyce that way was ended, he stoode
for hir majesty before the French, for he knew the French was
advertysed that he was the dealer against Monsieur; but
otherwyse yf he ether lost offyce or credytt for hir majesties
sake, lett my credytt be lost with you and all the frendes I
have; so well have I enquyred of his doinges. But lett him and
all these pass. I pray you lett spedy care be taken what course
hir majesty wyll take, as a thing most nedefull, and tyme ys
most precyous.
   And, though I have not byn wylling to make the worst of
thinges, yet wyll I not be thought so yll an husband as some I
hear wold make me, that I have received of these states not only
all the ordynarye allowed beforehand, but also the
extraordinarye to the somme of 400,000=li= sterling. First, I
wyll say, I never received the therd parte of the ordinary, and
for the extraordinary, hit was 400,000 florins, and not poundes,
which shuld have byn payd in March, Aprill, May, and June; but
the first of that we never received before August, and of that
ther ys one 100,000 dewe yet; and of the 300,000 disbursed, yf
ther hath byn paid in money 70,000 to the soldyers hit hath byn
a myllion. But they doe make reckoning of all ther vyttell, of
ther armour, and wepon, and of their lyke provissions, for which
I dare asure yt to you, they have v, vj, viij month day for
payment, and yet these provissions be of some their owen. Than
judge you, what dealing this ys, or whether these sommes may be
said "delivered" to us in money, or no. For the same tyme they
take with the marchant for vyttell and munytion, the same might
they use for the benyfyt of the soldyer; for, before vj or v
months come out, they myght make other money reddy for to pay
the marchant, and relyve the soldyer in the meane tyme with that
which they turn to their own benyfytt; but they deny all this,
albeyt yt be playnly knowen.
   So, praing to the Lord to dyrect all your councelles to his
glory
<P 427>
and hir majesties saftye, I comytt you to his protectyon. In
hast, this 2. of October.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my honourable good frend sir Francis
Walsingham, knight, her majesties principall secretarie.

<Q LEY 1586 WCECIL>
<A WILLIAM CECIL>
<G M>
<P 449>
[} [\LETTER CLXVI. LORD BURGHLEY TO THE EARL OF LEYCESTER. 4TH
NOVEMBER, 1586.\] }]
   My very good lord, this gentleman, Mr. Gorge, commeth thyther
with such hast, as I have no lesur to wryte as otherwise I wold,
but breffly. I have, accordyng to your lordships late lettres,
moved hir majesty for your lordships licenss to retorn, wherunto
hir majesty is of hirself very willyng, as well for the desyre
she hath to se your lordship, as for the dout she also hath that
thys wyntar season yow might fall into some sycknes; but yet
herwith she also is very carefull how those countrees may be
governed without harm to the public cause, and how hir own army,
consistyng of hir people, might also be ruled and directed; of
both which, though hir majesty hath had some kind of speches,
yet she myndeth not to mak any resolution but by your lordships
advise. Yet, for the government of hir army, I perceave she will
laye the chardg uppon my lord Gray, who will shun it I am sure
as much as he may, and yet I have perswaded hir majesty to
encorradg hym with the remission of an Irish det that, in
conscience, he ought not to paye.
   I told Mr. Gorge by speche, that seing ther is treasur sent
over, wherof your lordship had no knolledg at your late wrytyng,
I wold
<P 450>
wish your lordship to se the same, or the gretar part, issued
out wher is most nede, but specially to mak full payes to some
day certen.
   For the government ther in your lordships absence we here
cannot gyve any advise, but, consideryng your lordships great
experience there, whatsoever your lordship shall declare to be
mete I will assent therto, and by my advise to hir majesty
furder it as reason is. Some spek of namyng the count Morrice to
be governor alon in your absence, and as to have the rule under
your lordship; some wish that the count Moryce shuld be joyned
with the lord Graye. The queenes majesty wold that it war in the
states direction ageyn as it was befor they committed it to your
lordship, with the direction of the lord Graye as lieutenant of
hir army; but suerly I feare greatly the success hereof, for the
generall evill opinion conceaved, both by the people and the men
of warr, ageynst the particular persons representyng the states,
except ther might be a new election by the severall provynces of
new and more upright persons to represent the states.
   My lord, though presently it semeth your lordship to be
greved with the sondry mislykynges of hir majesty signefyed by
her privat lettres, for sondry thynges wherof your lordship hath
sufficient matter to discharg yourself, yet I dowt not but uppon
your lordships retorn to hir presence, she will be fully
satisfyed by your lordships own good answers, for so I myself do
conceave the issew will so be proved. And so, by reason of Mr.
Gorges hasty departure, I am compelled to end. From Westminster,
4. November, 1586.
   Yesterday all we commissioners [\perfected\] our sentence
against the Scottish quene, with on full assent, but I feare
more slackness in hir majesty than will stand ether with hir
suerty or with ours. God direct hir hart to follow faythfull
counsell.
   Your lordships most assured to my power,
   W. Burghley.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 453>
[} [\LETTER CLXVIII. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 5TH NOVEMBER, 1586.\] }]
   I humbly beseeche your lordship, that this bearer may receyve
your honorable assystaunce in the recovarye of sooch imprestes
as have been made by his late master unto sooche as served under
him. Sir Philip hathe lefte a great nombur of poore credytors;
what order he hathe taken by his wyll for ther satysfactyon I
<P 454>
knowe not. Yt is trewe, that, immedyatly after the deathe of his
father, he sent me a letter of attorney for the sale of sooche
portyon of lande as myght content his credytors, wherin there
was nothing don, before his deathe. I have payde, and must paye,
for him above 6,000=li=, which I doe assure your lordship hath
browght me into a most harde and desperat state, which I waighe
nothing in respeact of the losse of the gentleman, whoe was my
chefe worldly compforte. Sorry I am to take any occasyon to
revyve the memorye of him to the renewing of your lordships
grefe, for the which I praye pardon, and so I most humbly take
my leave. At Barne ealmes, the v=th= of November, 1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra. Walsyngham.

<Q LEY 1586 FWALSINGHAM>
<A FRANCIS WALSYNGHAM>
<G M>
<P 456>
[} [\LETTER CLXX. MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM TO THE EARL OF
LEYCESTER. 6TH NOVEMBER, 1586.\] }]
   My verry good lord, even as I had gyven this bearer his
dyspatche I receaved a letter from Mr. Davyson, by the which he
dyd sygnefye unto me that her majesties pleasure was, that I
shoold wryte unto your lordship to stay the commyng of the
commyssioners, for that she is in no sort wyllyng to be pressed
in a matter that she is alreadye resolved not to procead in.
Thes be the verry wordes of his letter, which I refer to your
lordships consideratyon. Monsieur Burgrave is alreadye come to
London. I have appoynted on Mondaye next to speake with him, and
wyll, for your lordships sake and the good commendatyon you gave
him, use him with all the favor I may.
   I have caused sir Philip Sydneys wyll to be consydered of by
certeyn learned in the lawes, and I fynd the same imperfect
towching the sale of his land for the satysfyeng of his poore
credytors, which I doe assure your lordship doth greatly afflyct
me, [{that{] a
<P 457>
gentleman that hath lyved so unspotted [{a{] reputatyon, and had
so great care to see all men satysfyed, shoold be so [{exposed{]
to the owtcrye of his creditors. His goodes wyll not suffyce to
awnsware a third parte of his debtes alreadye knowen. This hard
estate of this noble gentleman makethe me staye to take order
for his buryall untyll your lordships returne. I doe not see
howe the same can be performed with that solempnytye that
apperteynethe withowt the utter undoing of his credytors, which
is to be weyed [\in\] conscyence. Sorrye I am to troble your
lordship with these unplesaunt matters, but that a necessitye
movethe me therto. And so hoping to see your lordship here, I
most humbly take my leave. At Barne elmes the vj. of November,
1586.
   Your lordships to commaund,
   Fra. Walsingham.
[\ADDRESSED,\] For her majestyes speciall affaires. To the right
honoorable my verie good lord the erle of Leicester, lord
lieutenaunt-generall of hir majestyes forces in the Lowe
Countries, &c.
   W. Davison.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 480>
[} [\THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM. 22ND
DECEMBER, 1586.\] }]
   I am hartyly sorry for any further vysitacion to com to that
howse, for I must every way be partaker therof. But you and I
must yeld to His gracious chastysment who knoweth best what ys
fytt for us both.
   I confes that I se what you fynde, and I fele lyke you have
founde. The Lord that inflycteth us here with sharpnes can, and
I know wyll, recompence us elleswhere x, xx and xxx fold, to our
everlasting joye and comfort. Wherfore I pray for you, as for
myself, that the same Lord wyll contynew us in strength, and
strengthen us in pacyence to receyve His blessyd wyll, as
becomyth us. The lettre you sent me I wyll suspend my
<P 481>
opinion, albeytt I fear he ys not the man we thought him. God
grant us his peace, and the rest of our yeres to pass in his
fear, and so to his blessyd protectyon I leave ye. Hast this 22
of December, 1586.
   Yours assured,
   R. Leycester.
[\ADDRESSED\] To my honorable frend Mr. secretarye Walsingham.

<Q LEY 1586 RDUDLEY>
<A ROBERT DUDLEY>
<G M>
<P 481>
[} [\THE EARL OF LEYCESTER TO MR. SECRETARY WALSYNGHAM. 23RD
DECEMBER, 1586.\] }]
   I cannott be quyett tyll I may know how my daughter doth
amend, wyshing hir even as to my none child, which, God wylling,
I shall always esteme hir to be. I wold gladly make a start to
you, but to morrow king Antonio comes hether, but my hart ys
ther with you, and my prayers shall goe to God for you and for
yours. Ther ys a lettre com from the Scottish queen that hath
wroght tears, but I trust shall doe no further harm, albeyt the
delay ys so daungerous. Of all thinges that ys to be advertysed
I know Mr. secretary Davyson doth wryte to you, therefore I wyll
leave to trowble you, and commytt you to the Lord. From Grenwich
xxiij of December.
   Your assured frend,
   R. Leycester.
   Bycause I dowbt of your spedy repayr hether I pray you send
my ij leases, Mr. Secretary, to se what may be donn.
[\ADDRESSED\] To the right honorable Mr. secretary Walsingham.



<B ROYAL1>

[^LETTERS OF QUEEN ELIZABETH AND KING JAMES VI. OF SCOTLAND;
SOME OF THEM PRINTED FROM ORIGINALS IN THE POSSESSION OF THE
REV. EDWARD RYDER, AND OTHERS FROM A MS. WHICH FORMERLY BELONGED
TO SIR PETER THOMPSON, KT. ED. BY BRUCE, JOHN. CAMDEN FIRST
SERIES 46. 1849.^]

<Q RO1 1585 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 10>
[} [\NO. VI. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\January 1584-5.\]
<P 11>
   I mynde not deale, my deare brother, as wise men commenly
counsel, to try my trust with trifles first, and therby iuge of
like event, but haue agried to make my first assay of your many
promises and desires that you might knowe the way to please me
most; and therfor do require, that a question may, upon
allegeance, be demanded by yourselfe of the mastar Gray, whether
he knoweth not the prise of my bloude, wiche shuld be spild by
bloudy hande of a murtherar, wiche some of your nere-a-kin did
graunt. A sore question, you may suppose, but no other act than
suche as I am assured he knowes, and therfor I hope he wyl not
dare deny you a truthe; but yet I beseche you let it not seme to
come from me, to whom I made no semblance but ignorance. Let him
suppose that you receaued it elzwhere. O most wicked treachere,
to gusche the droppes of innocent bloud, yea, of suche as
perhaps hath saued often thers! As this toucheth me nearest, so
use it with best commodity, and let the answer be speded after a
thre or foure dayes after his retourne. It
<P 12>
may please you, aske it no sonar, lest he suspect it come of me,
from whom, according to trust, let it be kept.
   Your most assured sistar and cousin,
   [\UNSIGNED\] .
   God euer kepe you from al daungerous attempts, and graunt you
many yeres to liue and raigne.
[\ADDRESSED,\] (\Au roy d'Escose, mon bon frere et cousin.\)

<Q RO1 1585 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 12>
[} [\No. VII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES\] }] 
[\January or February 1584-5.\]
   I haue, right deare brother, receaued your frendly and
affectionat letters, in wiche I perceaue the mastar Grayes
halfe, limping answer, wiche is lame in thes respectz: the one,
for that I se not that he told you who bade him talke with
Morgan of the price of my bloude, wiche he knowes, I am assured,
right wel; nor yet hathe named the man that shuld be the
murtherar of my life. You wel perceaue that nothing may nearelar
touche me than this cause, and therfor, accordinge to the bond
of nature and the promes of strikte frindeship, let me coniure
you that this vilanye may be confest. I hope I may
<P 13>
stand you in bettar sted than that you wyl shew you uncareful of
suche a treason.
   And because I desiar that no cause be giuen of your part to
make me, or the lokers on, to slandar your good wyl, I heare,
out of my realme of Ireland, that Skotz assemble in great
troupes. Giue you charge immediatly, I most hartely require you,
that, upon paine of treason, the desist from suche action, and
so shal you bind me to recompence suche honorable traictment.
   And wher I perceaue that you expected the erles departur from
the bordars, it is true, vpon my honor, that I dispached
furthewith a charge unto them, wiche the answered, after a wekes
leasur, that the wer so indetted to my subiectz that the could
not, but I am sure by this time the ar departed. As for ther not
banisment out of my realme, I haue, by my secretary, signified
to the mastar Gray what reasons necessary to be considered moues
me therunto, specially sins the offar to submit themselues to
suffar as if the wer my subiectz offending me, and to take
condigne pain if, while the bid in my gouernement, the disobay
ther alegiance to you. And this, with the rest, I trust wyl
content you, as one that I wyll take as great care of, for your
honor and your surty, as whosoever may giue you more golden
promes with leaden performance.
   I beseche you let your answer be retournid me with your best
spede and most commoditye. Thus, not willing to molest you, I,
with my humblest deuotion, intreat the Almighty to protect you
from al inconveniens, and grant you many happy yeares.
   Your most assured sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] (\A monsieur mon bon frere et cousin le roy
d'Escosse.\)

<Q RO1 1585 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 16>
[} [\NO. X ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\June or July, 1585.\]
<P 17>
   Right deare brother, Your gladsome acceptance of my offred
amitie, togither with the desiar you seem to have ingraven in
your mynde to make merites correspondant, makes me in ful
opinion that some ennemis to our good wyl shal loose muche
travel, with making frustrat thar baiting stratagemes, whiche I
knowe to be many and by sondry meanes to be explored. I cannot
halt with you so muche as to denye that I haue seen suche
euident shewes of your contrarious dealings, that if I mad not
my rekening the bettar of the moneths, I might condemne you as
unworthy of suche as I mynd to shewe myselfe toward you, and
therfor I am wel pleased to take any coulor to defend your
honor, and hope that you wyl remember, that who seaketh two
stringes to one bowe, the may shute strong, but neuer strait;
and if you suppose that princes causes be vailed so couvertly
that no intelligence may bewraye them, deceave not yourselfe; we
old foxes can find shiftes to saue ourselves by others malice,
and come by knowledge of greattest secreat, spetiallye if it
touche our freholde. It becometh, therfor, all our rencq to
deale sincerely, lest, if we use it not, whan we do it, we be
hardly beleaved. I write not this, my deare brother, for dout
but for remembrances. My ambassador writes so muche of your
honorable traitment of him and of Alexandar, that I belive the
be convertid Scotes. You oblige me for them, for wiche I rendar
you a milion of most intire thankes, as she that meaneth to
desarue many a good thoght in your brest throwe good desart. And
for that your request is so honorable, retaining so muche
reason, I wer out of [{my{] sences if I shuld not suspend of any
hiresay til the answer of your owne action, wiche the actor
ought best to knowe, and so assure yourselfe I meane and vowe to
do; with this request, that you wyl affourd me the reciproque.
And thus, with my many petitions to the Almighty for your long
life and preservation, I ende thes skribled lines.
   Your verey assured lovinge sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
   (\A mon bon frere le roy d'Escose.\)

<Q RO1 1585 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 19>
[} [\NO. XII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\August 1585.\]
   Right deare brother, I find to true the Frenche adage,
(\Qu'un mal ne vint jamais seul\) ; for as the horrible and
soudain murdar of my most faithful subiect and most vaillant
baron was unto me a heartsore and grivous tidinges, so was it
tenfold redoubled with knowelege that a Skot shuld dare violate
his handes on any of our noble bloude, in a peacable concord,
whan our frendship shuld haue sent out his hotest beames to the
kindeling of the entier affection of bothe realmes; that any of
that nation shuld ons dare haue had a thoght to maculate suche a
contract of amitie. I perceive, by my ambassador, that your
grief is litel les than suche a hap deserveth, and do perceaue
that you haue not spared your wel-fauored, to cause him answer
suche a suspicion. I thinke myselfe, therfor, greatly
<P 20>
obliged unto your care for my satisfaction, and therin I thanke
you for being so considerast of your owne honor, wiche, I assure
you, lieth a-bleding in the bowels of many an Inglas man, until
ful rayson be made for suche a treacherye. God send us bettar
luck after our league be finished than this bloudy beginninge
may geue calendes of, elz many a red side wil folowe suche
demerites. But I hope you wyl spare no man that may be douted of
suche a meaning. I meane, not only of the murdar but of the
breaking out upon our borderars, wiche commonly ar the
beginnings of our quarelz. I dout nothinge of your curious care
in this behalfe, and for that the warden of that marche hathe
bine the open and commen fosterar and compagnion of the traitor
Westmarland and his complices in France and Scotland, I hope you
wil agrie to send him to my handes, wher he shal neuer receaue
iniurie nor ivel measure. And thus, desiring [{you{] to credit
my ambassador in certain particularites that he shal impart unto
you as to myselfe, I recommend you to Gods safe tuition, who
graunt you many gladsome yeres.
   Your most affectionat sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED\] (\A mon bon frere et cousin, le roy d'Escose.\)

<Q RO1 1585 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 22>
[} [\NO. XV. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\November 1585.\]
<P 23>
   Right deare brother, the strangenes of harde accidens that ar
arrived here, of unloked for, or unsuspected, attemps in
Skotland, euen by some suche as lately issued out of our lande,
constraineth me, as wel for the care we have of your person as
of the discharge of our owne honor and consciense, to send you
immediatly this gentleman, one that appartaineth to us in bloud,
bothe to offer you all assistance of helpe as al good indeuor of
counceil, and to make hit plaine that we delt plainly. Thes
lordes makeng great outcryes that I wold not or coulde helpe
them to be restored; I, by ther great importunitie, yelded, that
if I might be fried of my assurance given unto you for ther safe
kiping, I wold consent to ther departure, and so, after your
answer, as my thoght most honorable, that the might take ther
way to Germany with your gracious graunt of some livelode, after
a weekes space I gaue them my pasport and so dismissed them,
without, I swere unto you, ons the sight of any one of them.
Now, whan I way how suddenly, beyond my expectation, this suddan
stur ariseth, and fering lest some ivel and wicked person might
surmise that this was not without my forsight, I beseche you
trust my actions accordinge the measure of my formar dealings
for your safety, and ansuerable to the rule of reason, and you
shal find, that few princes wyl agrye to constraint of ther
equalz, muche les with compulsion of ther subiects. Juge of me,
therfor, as of a kinge that caries no abiect nature, and thinke
this of me, that, rather than your daungier, I wyl ventur myne;
and albeit I must confesse that it is daungerous for a prince to
irritast to muche, through iuel aduise, the generalitie of great
subiectz, so might you or now haue folowed my aduise, that wold
neuer betray you with unsound counceil; and now to conclude,
making hast, I pray you be plain with this bearar, that I may
knowe
<P 24>
what you wold that I should do, without excuse hireafter, that
constrained you did hit, for I dare assure you of his secresye,
and therof be you bold. For the lord Russelz dethe, and other
thinges, I referre me to this gentilman, who I dare promis is of
no faction beside my wyl. God blesse you in al safety as I
wysche myself.
   Your tru assured cousin and sistar,
   Elizabeth R.
   Feare not, for your life must be thers, or els the shal smart
wel, euery mothers son of them.
[\ADDRESSED,\] (\A mon trescher frere le roy d'Escose.\)

<Q RO1 1586 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 26>
[} [\NO. XVII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\January 1585-6.\]
   Right deare brother, I am not a litel satisfaict of many a
carefull thoght that my mynde tossed up and downe, with doutes
what care might do to a kings brest, invirunned of a seubdain
with so vnlooked for an accident; my thankes, therfor, may
sca[{r{]se be contained in this paper for your most acceptable
messanger, whom it pleased you to commaund [{for{] my
satisfaction of your good estat, togither with your good liking
of the lordes and ther action, whom I
<P 27>
beseche God no longar preserue in life, than the be ready for
your preservation to spend all thers; so far wer euer my intentz
from any trechery towarde you. And wheras your desiar seameth
great that the league in hand myght come to ende, I am
addressing a gentilman vnto you for the same purpose, and wyl
delay no time for so good a intent, trusting than, that no
whispering treason shal haue credit in your eare to retarde or
cut of so nideful an action. Suppose suche, I pray you, to
resemble a golden houke that oft deceaues the vnwary fische, and
makes him receaue his worst in lieu of bettar hope.
   Amidz al thes kind dealings of yours, let me not forget how
litel care the worlde shal thinke you prise me at, if in middest
of greatest frindship, my los of honor be no whit repaired for
the shamful murther of the baron Russell. Pondar it depely, I
beseche you, for hit striketh nere me, so publik an iniurye to
haue no redres, without we shewe the thoght, wiche God alone
reserues his part. The like answer was neuer yet giuen, and
[{I{] hope for bettar paiment.
   For your churche matters, I do bothe admire and reioise to
see your wise paraphrase, wiche far excedeth ther texte. Since
God hathe made kinges, let them not unmake ther authorite, and
let brokes and smal rivers acknowledge ther springes, and flowe
no furdar than ther bankes. I praise God that you uphold euer a
regal rule.
   For all other matters wiche this gentilman hathe told me, I
wil hope stil that your faithful profession of constantie in my
behalfe shal far surmount the devellishe practises and suttel
iniquitie of those wiche, undar pretence of your aduancement,
wil skanten your best fortiune. And albeit I am aduertised, even
from amonge themselves, that your assurance to them doth shewe,
that al my faire offers from you be (\ad Ephesios\) and
ridiculus, meaning wholy to folow them and temporise with me,
yet I mynd to (\peccare in meliorem\) if I must nides be
begiled, and mynd not to trust them til I see you faile me, and
than (\deceptis ad decipientem digne vertitur\) . Til than, I
wyl trust your worde, and dare assure you shal neuer, on my
behalfe, haue cause to
<P 28>
repent your woues, meaning you no les good than I pray God euer
to afourde me, prayinge him longe to conserve you. And to ende
this lettar, let me not forget to recommend this gentlemans good
behavor in this his charge, hauing used it to your honor and his
great praise. Thus I finische to troble you, but do rest,
   Your most assuredzt louing sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my deerest brother and cousin the king of
Scotts.

<Q RO1 1586 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 28>
[} [\NO. XVIII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\February 1585-6.\]
   Right deare brother, Determining with myselfe to sende you
some one of whose affection I had profe towarde your estat and
parson, have resolved of this gentilman, who in your childesche
yeres sought all menes of your preservation, and was the
instrument to have you served by them that folowed no other
rular than your raigne, and for that cause suffred hard
assaultes, yea to the present peril of life, wiche was soght
sondry wayes, and ons by bullet of pistol, as he had to shew.
Suppose you that suche a one, so used, wold be hasty to go on
this viage, wer it not my spetiall charge, wiche only I do for
the longe experience that he hathe had of that country, and so
the bettar able to serve us bothe, for I dare swere he hathe no
other scope than to kipe us frendes, and increase that bond. And
if he
<P 29>
find any opposite against so good a worke, he wyl obviat it if
he may, and wyl serve you in any thing that may advance your
honor and quiat, according to his commission; praying you to
have regard unto him and his honorable traictment, that I may
haue no cause to reuenge his wronge; not douting but if you knew
his nature and honesty, as I do, you wold not estime him menely.
I assure you he is of muche valeur bothe for wit and discretion;
in whom ther was never found trechery. Thus I end, with my
prayers to God for your long continuance.
   Your assured sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] (\A mon bon frere le roy d'Escose.\)

<Q RO1 1586 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 29>
[} [\NO. XIX. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }]
[\March 1585-6.\] 
   The expertist seamen, my deare brother, makes vant of ther
best shippes whan the pas the highest bellowes without yelding,
and broke nimlest the roughest stormes. The like profe, I
suppose, may best be made, and surest boste, of frindes, whan
greatest persuasions and mightiest ennemis oppose themselues for
parties. If than a constant
<P 30>
irremouable good wyll appere, thar is best triall made. And for
that I knowe ther is no worse orator for truthe than malice, nor
shwredar invahar than envye, and that I am sure you haue wanted
nether, to assaile your mynde to win it from our frindeship; if
not auailing all thes minars, you kipe the hold of your promised
inward affection, as Randol at lengthe haue told me and your
owne lettars assure me, I dare thus boldly affirme, that you
shall haue the bettar part in this bargain. For when you way in
equal balance, with no palsey hande, the very ground of ther
desires that wold withdrawe you, it is but roote of mischif to
peril your selfe, with hope to harme her who euer hathe
preserued you; and sins you may be sure that Skotland, nor
yourself, be so potent, as for your greatnes the seake you, nor
neuer did, but to iniure a thirde; and if you rede the
histories, ther is no great cause of bost for many conquests,
thogh your contry sarued ther malice. This you see the beginning
why euer Skotland hathe bine sought. Now, to come to my ground
worke, only natural affection (\ab incunabulis\) sturrid me to
saue you from the murderars of your father, and the peril that
ther complices might brede you. Thus, as in no counterfait
miroir, you may behold without maske the faces of bothe
beginnars. It is for you to juge what ar like to be the best
euent of bothe, and therafter I pray God you may use your best
choise to your surest good, no semblant false to begile. And as
I reioyse to haue had, iven in this hammering worlde, suche
presant profe of your sincerite, so shal you be sure to imploye
it upon no gileful person, nor suche as wil not take as muche
regard of your good as of her owne.
   Tochinge an "instrument," as your secretarye terme it, that
you desiar to haue me signe, I assure you, thogh I can play of
some, and haue bine broght up to know musike, yet this disscord
wold be so grose as wer not fit for so wel-tuned musicke. Must
so great dout be made of fre good wyl, and gift be so
mistrusted, that our signe Emanuel must assure? No, my deere
brother. Teache your new rawe
<P 31>
counselars bettar manner than to aduis you such a paringe of
ample meninge. Who shuld doute performance of kinges offer? What
dishonor may that be demed? Folowe next your owne nature, for
this neuer came out of your shoppe. But, for your ful
satisfaction, and to plucke from the wicked the weapon the wold
use to brede your doubt of meanings, thes the be. First, I wil,
as longe as you with iuel desart alter not your course, take
care for your safety, helpe your nide, and shun al actes that
may damnifie you in any sort, ether in present or future time;
and for the portion of relife, I minde neuer to lessen, thogh,
as I see cause, I wil rather augment. And this I hope may stand
you in as muche assuranse as my name in parchement, and no les
for bothe our honors.
   I can not omit, also, to request you, of all amitie betwine
us, to haue good regard of the longe-waiting expectation that
all our subjectes lokes after, that some persons be deliuered in
to my handes for some repaire of my honor thogh no redres for
his dethe, according as my ambassador Randol shal signifie, and
that ther be no more delais, wiche haue bine ouer many already.
And thus I end my trobling you. Comittinge you to the tuition of
the living God, who graunt you many yeres of prosperous raigne.
   Your most assured louinge sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.

<Q RO1 1586 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 33>
[} [\NO. XXI. ELIZABETH TO JAMES VI.\] }] 
[\May, 1586.\]
   I muse muche, right deare brother, how possiblie my wel-ment
lettar, prociding from so fauteles a hart, could be ether
misliked or misconstred; and first, for my promis made of
reciproke usage in all amicable maner, I trust I nether haue,
nor neuer shall, make fraction of in the lest scruple; and as
for doute of your perfourmance of your vowe made me, I assure
you, if I did not trust your wordes, I shuld estime but at smale
valew your writings, and if you please to reade againe my last
lettar, you shall perceaue how muche I prise your tried
constancy for all the many assaultes that, I am sure, your eares
haue bin assailled with, and therfor I am far from dout, whan
suche profe is made, and you might worthely forthinke you to
haue bestowed so muche faithful dealinge upon one that ether had
smal iugement or muche ingratitude, and therof I may clerely
purge me from suche crime, for I haue more iust cause to
acknowelege thankefulnis manifold, than, in any part, to ouerrun
my owne wit to leue it behind me.
   And for the some that you suppose my many affaires made me
forget, togither with the maner of the instrument, or lettar,
(\quocunque
<P 34>
nomine datur\) . For the first, I assure you I never gaue
commission for more. Some other might mistake, as Raudol wil tel
you. And for the lettar, some wordes and fourme was suche as
fitted not our two frindeships, as Randol also can shewe you,
but I haue sent you a lettar that I am sure containes all you
desired in spetiall wordes. I trust it shal content you;
although I must say for myselfe this muche, that the pithe and
effect of all you receiued afore; and beseche you thinke, that I
finde it my greatest fault that I remember but to well, yea,
many times more than I wolde, but never aught that may be for
your behoffe, ether in honor or contentation, shal euer slip out
of my mind, but wil take so good regarde unto it as that it euer
shal nerely touche myselfe; as knoweth God, who euer preserue
you from deceitful counseil, and graunt you true knowlege of
your assured, with longe and many yeres to raigne.
   Your most affectionate and assured louing sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED\] (\A mon bon frere et cousin le roy d'Escosse.\)

<Q RO1 1586 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 37>
[} [\NO. XXIII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\4th October, 1586.\]
<P 38>
   I hope, my deare brother, that my many waighty affayres in
present may make my lawful excuse for the retardance of the
answer to your ambassadeurs charge, but I doute not but you shal
be honorably satisfaict in all the pointz of his commission, and
next, after my owne errand done, I must rendar you my
innumerable thankes for suche amicable offers as hit hathe
pleased you make, making you assured that, with Gods grace, you
shal neuer have cause to regrat your good thoghtz of my meaninge
to deserue as muche good wil and affection as euer one prince
owed another, wisching all meanes that may maintaine your
faithful trust in me, that neuer wyl seake aught but the
increase of your honor and safty. I was in mynd to haue sent you
suche accidentz as this late monethe brought furthe, but the
sufficientie of mastar Archebal made me retaine him, and do
rendar you many loving thankes for the joy you take of my narow
escape from the chawes of dethe, to wiche I might easely haue
fallen but that the hand of the hiest saued me from that snare.
   And for that the curse of that desaing rose up from the
wicked sucgestion of the Jesuites, wiche make hit an axceptable
sacrifice to God, and meritorieus to themselfe, that a kinge not
of ther profession shuld be murthered, therfor I could kipe my
pen no longar from discharging my care of your person, that you
suffer not suche vipars to inhabite your lande. The say you gaue
leue undar your hand that the might safely come and go. For Gods
loue regard your surety aboue all perswations, and account him
no subiect that intertaines them. Make not edictz for skorne,
but to be obserued. Let them be rebelles, and so pronunsed, that
preserue them.
   For my part, I am sorier that the cast away so many goodly
gentilmen than that the soght my ruine. I thanke God I haue
taken
<P 39>
more dolor for some that ar gilty of this murther than beare
them malice that the soght my dethe. I protest hit before God.
But suche iniquitie will not be hide, be hit neuer so craftely
handeled; and yet, whan you shal here all, you wyl wondar that
one accownted wise wyl use suche matter so fondly. But no
marvel, for whan the ar giuen to a reprobat sence the offen make
suche slip.
   I haue bine so tedious that I take pitie of your paine, and
so wyl ende this skribling, praying you beliue that you could
neuer haue chosen a more sure trust that wil neuer begile than
myself, who dayly prayes to God for your longe prosperitie.
   Your most assured louing sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED\] (\A mounsieur mon bon frere et cousin le roy
d'Escose.\)

<Q RO1 1586 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 39>
[} [\NO. XXIV. ELIZABETH TO JAMES\] }] 
[\15th October, 1586.\]
<P 40>
   My deare brother, Hit hathe sufficiently infourmed me of your
singular care of my estat and brething that you haue sent one,
in suche diligence, to understand the circumstancis of the
treasons wiche lately wer lewdly attempted and miraculously
vttred. Of whiche I had made participant your embassador afor
your lettars came. And now am I to shewe you, that, as I haue
receaved many writings from you of great kindnis, yet this last
was fraughted with so careful passion, and so effectuall
utterance of all best wisches for my safety, and offer of as
muche as I could haue desired, that I confes, if I shuld not
seake to decerue it, and by merites tye you to continuance, I
wer ivell-wordy suche a frind; and, as the thankes my hart
yeldes my pen may skant rendar you, so shal the ownar euer
decerue to shewe hit not ivel imploied, but on suche a prince as
shall requite your good wyl, and kipe a wacheful yee to all
doings that may conserne you.
   And whereas you offer to send me any traitor of myne residing
in your land, I shal not faille but expect th'accomplischement
of the same in case any suche shal be, and require you, in the
menetime, that spidy deliuerye may be maid of the Cars, wiche
toucheth bothe my conscience and honor.
   I thanke God that you beware so sone of Jesuites, that haue
bine the source of al thes trecheries in this realme, and wyl
sprede, like an iuel, wide, if at the first the be not wided
out. I wold I had had Prometheus for companion, for Epimetheus
had like have bine myne to sone. What religion is this, that the
say the way to saluation is to kil the prince for a merit
meritorious? This is that the haue all confessed without tortur
or menace. I swere hit, on my worde.
<P 41>
   Far be hit from Skotland to harbor any suche, and therfor I
wische your good providence may be duly executed, for elz lawes
resemble cobwebbes, whens great bees get out by breaking, and
small flies stiks fast for wekenis.
   As concerning the retarding of your answers to al pointz of
your ambassadors charge, you had receved them or now but that
matters of that weight that I am sure you wold willingly knowe
can not as yet receaue a conclusion, and til that mastar Douglas
doth tarye; and with his retourne I hope you shal receaue
honorable requital of his amicable embassade, so as you shal
have no cause to regret his arrival; as knoweth the Lord, whom
ever I beseche to send you many joiful dayes of raigne and life.
   Your most assured louing and faithful sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
   I must giue you many thankes for this poore subject of myne,
for whom I wil not stik to do al pleasure for your request, and
wold wische him undar the grond if he shuld not serue you with
greatest faithe that any seruant may. I haue wylled him tel you
some thinges from me; I beseche you heare them fauorablie.
[\ADDRESSED\] (\A mon bon frere e cousin le roy d'Escose.\)

<Q RO1 1587 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 41>
[} [\NO. XXV. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\January, 1586-7.\]
<P 42>
   I finde myselfe so trobled lest sinistar tales might delude
you, my good brother, that I haue willingly found out this
messanger, whom I knowe most sincere to you and a true subiect
to me, to carry unto you my most sincere meaning toward you, and
to request this iust desiar, that you neuer dout my intiere good
wyll in your behalfe; and do protest, that, if you knewe, even
sins the arrivall of your commissionars, (wiche if the list the
may tell you,) the exstreme dangier my life was in, by an
embassadors honest silence, if not invention, and suche good
complices as haue themselues, by Godz permission, unfolded the
hole conspiratie, and haue aduouched hit befor his face, thoght
hit be the peril of ther owne lives, yet voluntaryly, one of
them neuer beinge suspected brake hit with a councelar to make
me acquanted therwith. You may see whither I kipe the serpent
that poisons me, whan the confes to haue reward. By sauing of
her life the wold haue had mine. Do I not make myself, trowe ye,
a goodly
<P 43>
pray for euery wretche to deuour? Transfigure yourself into my
state, and suppose what you aught to do, and therafter way my
life, and reiect the care of murdar, and shun all baites that
may untie our amities, and let all men knowe, that princes knowe
best their owne lawes, and misiuge not that you knowe not. For
my part, I wyl not liue to wronge the menest. And so I conclude
you with your owne wordes, you wyl prosecute or mislike as muche
thos that seake my ruine as yf the sought your hart bloud, and
wold I had none in myne if I wold not do the like; as God
knoweth, to whom I make my humble prayers to inspire you with
best desiars.
   Your most affectionated sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
   I am sending you a gentilman fourwith, the other being fallen
sick, who I trust shal yeld you good reason of my actions.
[\ADDRESSED\] To my verey good brother and cousin, the king of
Skotz.

<Q RO1 1587 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 43>
[} [\NO. XXVI. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\About 1st February, 1586-7.\]
   Be not caried away, my deare brother, with the lewd
perswations of suche, as insteade of infowrming you of my to
nideful and helpeles
<P 44>
cause of defending the brethe that God hath given me, to be
better spent than spilt by the bloudy invention of traitors
handz, may perhaps make you belive, that ether the offense was
not so great, or if that cannot serue them, for the
over-manifest triall wiche in publik and by the greatest and
most in this land hathe bine manifestly proved, yet the wyl make
that her life may be saved and myne safe, wiche wold God wer
true, for whan you make vewe of my long danger indured thes
fowre - wel ny fiue - moneths time to make a tast of, the
greatest witz amongs my owne, and than of French, and last of
you, wyl graunt with me, that if nide wer not mor than my malice
she shuld not have her merite.
   And now for a good conclusion of my long-taried-for answer.
Your commissionars telz me, that I may trust her in the hande of
some indifferent prince, and have all her cousins and allies
promis she wil no more seake my ruine. Deare brother and cousin,
way in true and equal balance wither the lak not muche good
ground whan suche stuf serves for ther bilding. Suppose you I am
so mad to truste my life in anothers hand and send hit out of my
owne? If the young master of Gray, for curring faueur with you,
might fortune say hit, yet old master Mylvin hath yeres ynough
to teache him more wisdome than tel a prince of any jugement
suche a contrarious frivolous maimed reason. Let your
councelors, for your honour, discharge ther duty so muche to you
as to declaire the absurditie of such an offer; and, for my
part, I do assure myselfe to muche of your wisdome, as, thogh
like a most naturall good son you charged them to seake all
meanes the could deuis with wit or jugement to save her life,
yet I can not, nor do not, allege any fault to you of thes
persuations, for I take hit that you wil remember, that advis or
desiars aught ever agree with the surtye of the party sent to
and honor of the sendar, wiche whan bothe you way, I doute not
but your wisdome wil excuse my nide, and waite my necessitie,
and not accuse me ether of malice or of hate.
   And now to conclude. Make account, I pray you, of my firme
frindeship loue and care, of which you may make sure accownt, as
one
<P 45>
that never mindz to faile from my worde, nor swarve from our
league, but wyl increase, by all good meanes, any action that
may make true shewe of my stable amitie; from wiche, my deare
brother, let no sinistar whisperars, nor busy troblars of
princis states, persuade to leave your surest, and stike to
vnstable staies. Suppose them to be but the ecchos to suche whos
stipendaries the be, and wyl do more for ther gaine than your
good. And so, God hold you ever in his blessed kiping, and make
you see your tru frinds. Excuse my not writing sonar, for paine
in one of my yees was only the cause.
   Your most assured lovinge sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED\] To my deare brother and cousin, the kinge of
Skotz.

<Q RO1 1588 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 47>
[} [\NO. XXVIII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\RECEIVED 15 MAY, 1588.\]
   My pen, my deare brother, hathe remained so long dry as I
suppose hit hardly wold have taken ynke againe, but, mollefied
by the good justice that with your owne person you have bine
pleased to execute, togither with the large assurance that your
wordes have
<P 48>
given to some of my ministars, wiche all dothe make me ready to
drinke most willingly a large draught of the rivar of Lethe,
never minding to thinke of unkindnes, but to turne my yees to
the making vp of that sure amitie and stanche good wyll wiche
may be presently concluded in ending our league, that so
unhappyly, to my harts grife, was delaied and differd, assuring
you, on the faith of a christian and worde of a king, that my
hart cannot accuse my conscience of one thoght that might
infringe our frindship, or let so good a worke. God the chersar
of all harts euer so haue misericorde of my soule as my
innocencye in that mattar deserveth, and no otherwise; wiche
invocation wer to dangerous for a gilty conscience; as I have
commanded this bearar more at large to tel you. And for your
part, my deare brother, thinke, and that with most truith, that,
if I find you willing to imbrase hit, you shal find of me the
carefulst prince of your quiet gouuernment, ready to assist you
with forse, with treasor, counsel, or any thing you shal haue
nede of, as muche as in honor you can require, or upon cause you
shal nede. You may the more soundly trust my vowes, for never
yet wer the stained, nether wil I make you the first on whom I
shal bestowe untruthe, wiche God wyl not suffer me live unto.
   I have millions of thankes to rendar you, that so frankely
told to Cary suche offers as wer made you, wiche I doute not but
you shall euer haue cause to reioyse that you refuse; for wher
the meane to weken your surest frind, so be you assured the
intended to subiect you and yours. For you see how the deale
euen with ther owne in al countries lessar than ther one, and
therfor God, for your best, I assure myselfe, wil not let you
faule into suche an aperte daunger, undar the cloke, for al
that, of harming other and aduansing you; but I hope you wil
take Ulisses wexe to saue you from suche sirenes. Hit wer most
honorable for you, if so hit please you, to let them knowe that
you neuer sent for ther horse, thogh some of your lords (to bold
with you in many ther notions and over sawsy in this) made them
beliue you consented to ther message, wiche the themselues
desired your pardon for. This wyl make them feare you more
hereafter, and make them
<P 49>
affraid to attempt you to weaken your assured frind. If I
deserue not your amitie persecute me as your foe; but being
yours, use me like a prince who feareth none but God.
   Your most assured loving sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To our good brother and cousin, the king of
Scotland.

<Q RO1 1588 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 49>
[} [\NO. XXIX. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\About 1st July, 1588.\]
<P 50>
   I am greatly satisfied, my deare brother, that I find, by
your owne graunt, that you bilive the trothe of my actions so
manifestly openly proved, and thanke you infinitely that you
profes so constant defence of your country, togither [{with{]
myne, from all Spaniardz or strangers; a matter fur otherwise
given out by bothe our enemies, withe blotting your fame with
assurance of doble dealing, as thogh you assured them under-hand
to betake you to ther course; wiche, what a stain hit wer in a
princis honor, you yourselfe in jugement can wel deme. For my
part, I wyl ever trust your word, til I be so sure of the
contrary. Right wel am I persuaded that your greatest daunger
shuld chanche you by crossing your strait pathes, for he that
hathe two stringes to his bowe may shoute stronger, but never
strait; and he that hathe no sure foundation cannot but ruine.
God kipe you ever therefor in your wel-begone pathe.
   I have sent you this gentleman, as wel to declare my good
agrement to send some finischars of our leage, as other matters
wiche he hathe to communicate unto you, if hit please you to
heare him; as my desiar of answering your good frindeship and
amitie in as ample sort as with honor I may, as one that never
seakes more of you than that wiche shal be best for your selfe.
Assure your selfe of me, therfor, and shewe by dides ever to
mantaine hit, and never was ther in christendome betwine two
princes surar amitie nor soundar dealing. I vowe hit, and wil
performe hit.
   And for that you speake oft of satisfaction, I haue much
vrged, as now againe I do, to knowe what therby is ment, sins I
bothe mynde, and also do, whatsoever may honorably be required
of suche as I profes myselfe; and therfor, I require you therin
to answer me. And so, trusting that all your protestations
lately made me by Cary shalbe readely performed, togither with
your constant resolute cours of late professed, I end to molest
you longar, but, with my thankes to God that any your offendars
be entred to your hands, and not the les not having bine done
without some of our helpe, whiche glads me no les than [{if it
had{] happened to our selfe, whose forse shal never faile you in
all leaful causes: as knoweth God,
<P 51>
who euer bles you from all malignant spiritz, and increas your
happy yeres.
   Your most assurest sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To our right deere brother, the king of Scotland.

<Q RO1 1588 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 52>
[} [\NO. XXXI. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\August, 1588.\]
<P 53>
   Now may appeare, my deare brother, how malice conioined with
might strivest to make a shameful end to a vilanous beginning,
for, by Godz singular fauor, having ther flete wel-beaten in our
narow seas, and pressing, with all violence, to atcheue some
watering place, to continue ther pretended invation, the windz
have carried them to your costes, wher I dout not the shal
receaue smal succor and les welcome; vnles thos lordz that, so
traitors like, wold belie ther owne prince, and promis another
king reliefe in your name, be suffred to live at libertye, to
dishonor you, peril you, and aduance some other (wiche God
forbid you suffer them live to do). Therfor I send you this
gentilman, a rare younge man and a wise, to declare unto yov my
ful opinion in this greate cause, as one that neuer wyl abuse
you to serve my owne turne; nor wyl you do aught that myselfe
wold not perfourme if I wer in your place. You may assure
yourselfe that, for my part, I dout no whit but that all this
tirannical prowd and brainsick attempt wil be the beginning,
thogh not the end, of the ruine of that king, that, most
unkingly, euen in midz of treating peace, begins this wrongful
war. He hathe procured my greatest glory that ment my sorest
wrack, and hathe so dimmed the light of his svnshine, that who
hathe a wyl to obtaine shame let them kipe his forses companye.
But for al this, for yourselfe sake, let not the frendz of Spain
be suffred to yeld them forse; for thogh I feare not in the end
the sequele, yet if, by leaving them unhelped, you may increase
the Englisch hartz unto you, you shal not do the worst dede for
your behalfe; for if aught shuld be done, your excuse wyl play
the (\boiteux\) ; if you make not sure worke with the likely men
to do hit. Looke wel unto hit, I besiche you.
   The necessity of this matter makes my skribling the more
spidye,
<P 54>
hoping that you wyl mesure my good affection with the right
balance of my actions, wiche to you shalbe euer suche as I haue
professed, not douting of the reciproque of your behalfe,
according as my last messengier unto you hathe at large
signefied, for the wiche I rendar you a milion of grateful
thankes togither, for the last general prohibition to your
subiectz not to fostar nor ayde our general foe, of wiche I dout
not the obseruation if the ringeleaders be safe in your handz;
as knoweth God, who euer haue you in his blessed kiping, with
many happy yeres of raigne.
   Your most assured louing sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
To my verey good brother the king of Scottz.

<Q RO1 1589 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 55>
[} [\NO. XXXIII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\September, 1589.\]
<P 56>
   As no tidinges, my most deare brother, can euer come out of
season to me that may brede you honor or contentement, so this
last newes, thogh soudaine, of the aproching neare of your
coming quene, bids me so muche to bode you all the best
blessings that the mighty God can send you, as in witnis therof
to salute you bothe with an embassader, and some tokens, for
signe of the happinis I wische that feast, and the gladnis my
hart shuld haue receued if hit wer as lawfull to honor hit with
my presence as hit is sure that I bles hit with my orasonns. And
for that the spide of suche a bargen was far greatar than the
expectation of her arrivall, you wyll, I trust, blame yourselfe,
and impute no neglect to me, that my messangers come after the
solempnites; for I assure you, but for my honor sake, my wyl
wold haue hied ther post with smaller company than fitz my
place. And in meane while, let hit content you to giue me so
muche right as to assure yourselfe no witnis ther of so princely
a pact shall wische hit more succes, nor greatar lasting joy,
than myselfe, that wischeth sign king no longar while than to
see the perfourmance of suche alliance, hauinge besides
yourself, wiche is the principall, an inward zele, wiche, sins
my childhold, I haue borne to the parentes of your honorable
quene, to whome I desiar all felicitie, and neuer shal skrape
from my memorye the intire loue the bare me; as knoweth God, who
euer bles you and gide you.
   Your most assured loving sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my deare brother the king of Skotes.

<Q RO1 1590 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 57>
[} [\NO. XXXIV. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\1590.\]
   Althogh my faithe stands me, my deare brother, in so good
stede, as, without assurance by any one [{but{] your owne
hand-worke, I do beliue that God hathe, of his goodnes more than
your hide, prosperd to good end your vntimely and, if I dare tel
truthe, ivel-seasoned journey, yet I may no longar, thogh my
courage could stay me til you first began, that best hathe cause
to acknowelege thankfulnes, stay but let you knowe, what humble
sacrifice of thankes I yeld to the Omnipotent for your safest
stop for al your hard cours, and am so bold to chalenge some
part of that seurty to my heartiest oraisons powred out of no
fained lippes, wiche best is pleasing to his eares. And do
beseche the same to send you, in this noble-raced linage, suche
lasting joy as the continuance may yeld you bothe happy.
   And now to talke with you frely as paper may vttar conceit.
Eccept my howrely care for your broken countrey, to to muche
infected with the maladie of strangers humors, and to receue no
medecin so wel compounded as if the owner make the mixture
appropriatted to the qualetye of the siknes. Knowe you, my deare
brother, for certaine,
<P 58>
that thos ulcers that wer to muche skined with the doulcenes of
your applications wer but falsly shaded, and wer within filled
with suche venom as hathe burst out sins your departure with
most lewd offers to another king to enter your land, with
declaration of ther assured perfourmance of ther by-passed
helpes, and numbars great to take ether part. If with my yees I
had not vewed thes treasons, I would be aschamed to write them
you. And shal I tel you my thoght herein? I assure you, you ar
wel worthy of suche traitors, that, whan you knewe them, and had
them, you betraied your owne seurty in fauoring ther liues. Good
Lord! who but yourself wold haue left suche peple to be abel to
do you wrong. Giue ordar with spide that suche skape not your
correction, and hie your retourne, that is more your honor than
a other mans land, without you mynde to make you seme innocent
of your realmes ruine, whan absence wil sarue but for your bad
excuse. Sild recouvers kings ther dominion whan greattar posses
hit, yea, suche as ther owne skars may indure for ther tirany.
   My deare brother, you see how fur my intire care drawes me
out of the limites that anothers affaires shuld plucke me to,
but all suche error I hope you wyl impute to affection, not my
curiositie, and beare with ouerplaine imputation, sins hit
springs of so good a roote. I craue of you, for your owne best,
to authorize, yea, animate, your faithfulst and giltles of this
conspiratie, that the feare not to apprehend in time (I pray God
not to late), all suche as any way the may suspect or knowe to
be pertakers of this faction. Beliue no more to dandel such
babies, as may, or they come to honestie, shake your chaire, for
you haue had to sowre experience what suche vane opinions hath
bred you. I wyl not faile, from time to other, to warne suche as
I may thinke most clere of this infection of all my knowelege in
this dangerous season, daring so muche in your absence as to
animat them not to lingar this great mattar til your retourne,
for I knowe that wer to late; the dayes that the haue giuen ar
shortar than to expect so longe. If my prayers wer not more than
my good [{writing{] , I shuld be sory to retaine your yees on so
rude skribling, wherfor I
<P 59>
end, with my incessant prayers to God for your safe kiping and
ioyful retourne.
   Your most affectionat lovinge sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my deere brother and cousin the king of
Scotland.
   After the finisching of my lettar, ther came to my handz an
overtur that makes me suppose hit could not, nor durst not, haue
bine offerd me without your consent, albeit for hit I nether saw
your commission nor receued from you one word therof, but for al
that, hit makes me see that your sight serues you not alone for
present vewe, but makes you to beholde the state of distant
countries wiche do fele the smart of my vndeserued hate, and
makes the innocent bloud cal for reuenge of euel-framed
iniuries. And thogh my conscience cannot accuse my thoghts to
haue by any cause procured suche an ennemy, and that he hathe to
plainlye soght my life and kingdome, yet, I think myselfe
obliged to you that wold make end of so uniust a war, and
acknowelege the ded king of famous memorie more happy in suche
faithful councelars than I see many kings in ther liuing
seruantz. And for that they offer me, I wyl euer cronicle them
amonge the iust fulfillars of true trust. And albeit my wrongs
be suche as nature of a king aught rather, for ther particular,
dye than not reuenge, yet the top of my courage shal neuer
ouerstreche my hart from care of christian bloud, and for that
alone, no feare of him, I protest to God, from whom bothe iust
quarel, faithful subjectz, and valiant acts I dout not wil
defend: yet, am I thus content that you shal folowe the
wel-deuised methode, and if he wyl giue playne grant without a
gileful meaning, I wil make knowen that in me the lack of so
good a worke shal neuer be found.

<Q RO1 1590 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 60>
[} [\NO. XXXV. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\May 1590.\]
   The strife is great, my deare brother, wiche shuld win, ether
the care of your perilous journey or the joy of your safe
retourne, but, leuing them in ther batail, I assure you I can
scars giue a tru verdit who is the victorar, but only this I
dare say, that no one that liveth thankes God more deuoutly for
al your eskapes, nor is more joyful of your sure arrivall than
myself, who could not stay but salute you, togither with your
honorable espouse, and by this ambassade make you know how
grateful suche newes wer to me, besichen God to bles you withe
suche benedictions as he bestoith with largist giftes, and make
your contentementz long and prosperous.
   And now that you bied wher yourself, I doubt not, wyl haue an
accownt of what in your absence hathe bine ordred, I hope you
wyl not be careles of suche practisis as hathe passed from any
of yours without your commission, spetially suche attemptz as
might ruin your realme and danger you. If any respect whatever
make you neglect so expedient a worke, I am affraid your careles
hide wil worke your unlooked danger. Thinke not but I knowe how
some had the vewe of my lettars, in wiche you did your selfe les
honor than to me harme, and yet you see hit warnes me not ynough
from againe to ventur the like hap. But as no hate to any of
them (God I cal to witnis) procured me hireto, so only care of
your sure gouuernement hathe made me deale this far, and, if I
see al admonition so uaine, I wil hireafter wische al wel, but
counsel no more at all. I can not
<P 61>
forget to reiterat my thankes for suche your offars as hit
pleased you by justice-clarke to make me, and as I shal hire
more therof from you I shal concur with you in so holy an
action. And thus I end troubling you with my skribling, with my
prayers to the Almighty for al prosperitie in your dayes.
   Your most affectionat sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To our deere and loving brother the king of
Scotland. 

<Q RO1 1590 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 63>
[} [\NO. XXXVII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\6th July, 1590.\]
   Greatar promises, more affection, and grauntz of more
acknowelegings of receued good turnes, my deare brother, none
can bettar remember than this gentilman by your charge hathe
made me understand; wherby I thinke all my endeuors wel
recompensed, that see them so wel acknoweleged; and do trust
that my counseles, if the so muche content you, wil serue for
memorialz to turne your actions to serue the turne of your safe
gouernement, and make the lookars-on honor your worthe, and
reuerence suche a rular.
   And lest fayre semblance, that easely may begile, do not
brede your ignorance of suche persons as ether pretend religion
or dissemble deuotion, let me warne you that ther is risen,
bothe in your realme and myne, a secte of perilous consequence,
suche as wold haue no kings but a presbitrye, and take our place
while the inioy our privilege, with a shade of Godes word, wiche
non is juged to folow right without by ther censure the be so
demed. Yea, looke we wel unto them. Whan the haue made in our
peoples hartz a doubt of our religion, and that we erre if the
say so, what perilous
<P 64>
issue this may make I rather thinke than mynde to write.
(\Sapienti pauca.\) I pray you stap the mouthes, or make shortar
the toungz, of suche ministars as dare presume to make oraison
in ther pulpitz for the persecuted in Ingland for the gospel.
   Suppose you, my deare brother, that I can tollerat suche
scandalz of my sincere gouuernement? No. I hope, howsoeuer you
be pleased to beare with ther audacitie towards your selfe, yet
you wil not suffar a strange king receaue that indignitie at
suche caterpilars hand, that, instede of fruit, I am affraid wil
stuf your realme with venom. Of this I haue particularisd more
to this bearar, togither with other answers to his charge,
besiching you to heare them, and not to giue more harbor-rome to
vacabond traitors and seditious inventors, but to returne them
to me, or banische them your land. And thus, with my many
thankes for your honorable intertainementz of my late embassade,
I commit you to God, who euer preserue you com al iuel counsel,
and send you grace to folow the best.
   Your most assured loving sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my deere brother, the king of Scotland.

<Q RO1 1591 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 64>
[} [\NO. XXXVIII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\April 1591.\]
<P 65>
   My deare brother, As ther is naught that bredes more
for-thinking repentance and agrived thoughtes than good turnes
to harme the giuers ayde, so hathe no bonde euer tied more
honorable mynds, than the shewes of any acquital by grateful
acknowelegement in plain actions; for wordes be leues and dides
the fruites. Wiche I may not forget to remember in your present
fact, granted so frely, in deliuering up my lewde rebel, whose
person and forse, thogh nether be aught worthe, as who, for his
greatnes, being a base varlet, drawes few for sequel, nor his
birthe so great as a meanar than a prince nides feare, yet I
wold haue bine agrived that so lewde a mynd shuld haue found
fauor in so deare a brothers dominion, and do assure you, that I
wil lay this part in the safest cornar of my memorye, to serue
me for example of a like acquital, if suche ivel accident shuld
happen you. And in meane while, thanke myselfe, not you alone,
that haue made so good a choise of so sounde an election upon
whom to spend the chifest care of my endeuors, as I hope you
haue hiretofore tried, and this may make increase.
   The two gentilmen, I trust, shal receaue your thanke for
perfourming so wel ther charge, wiche, I beseche you for my
sake, the may receaue; not a litel wondring why your subiectz of
Glasco shuld doute the stop of ther trafique for so poore a
caytife, who was neuer of abilitie to make or giue trafique. The
ar sorely misinfourmed of his greatnes. A few sort of outlawes
fils up his traine, and of the meanest sort. I trust you wyl
make them knowe your faithful ministars must not be niknamed
"the English feade men."
<P 66>
I protest I haue no suche in your realme, for, if the principal
faile me, I shal neuer care for (\adiacentia\) .
   I rendar for this my most loving and deare thankes,
acknoweleging the kinnes more than the act, and bothe so
honorable as shal neuer be blotted out of my thankefulst mynde,
adding therto the sincere ordar giuen for our bordars matters;
tokens sufficient to shewe your grateful hart and princely mynd,
wiche I meane to requite and acknowlege, as knoweth the liuing
God, who I am sure wyl make your subiectz the surar that you
abhor anothers traitors. Among wiche, I must not forget your
most kind vsage in the answer that my arche-rebel, Westmarland,
shal receue from you, wiche shal serue him, and all suche, to
knowe that ther neuer shal remane with you ether helpe or hap
for suche wicked members of a kingly rule. This shal retourne to
you with triple fold of good regard amonge your owne, if the see
your justice to anothers traitor, yea to suche a one as made me
knowe a traitor in my land. I wyl end to troble your yees with
my skribling, but neuer end to care for you and yours as for my
owne. God euer bles you, and make you kipe your regal
authoritie, and make yours knowe you.
   Your most assured loving sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my verey good brother, the king of Scotz. d.
d.

<Q RO1 1592 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 69>
[} [\NO. XLI. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\January 1591-2.\]
<P 70>
   My deare brother, Thogh the heringe of your most daungerous
peril be that thing that I most reuerently rendar my most lowly
thankes to God that you, by his mighty hand, hath skaped, yet
hathe hit bine no other hazard than suche as bothe hathe bine
forsien and fortold; but Cassandra was neuer credited til the
mishap had rather chanched than was prevented. The poore man
who, against his wyl, was intercepted with all suche epistelz as
traitors sent and receved, was for reward put to the bootes; so
litel was any thing regarded that procided from your best frind,
and yet the matter made to aparant, or many days after, throw
the traiterous assembly of your euidant rebelz, that with banner
displaied and again you in the fild. Thes wer the calendes of
this late attempt. I knowe not what to write, so litel do I like
to loose labor in vaine; for if I saw counsel auaill, or aught
pursued in due time or season, I shuld thinke my time fortunatly
spent to make you reape the due fruit of right oportunitie; but
I see you haue no luk to helpe your state, nor to assure you
from treasons leasur. You giue to muche respit to rid your harme
and shorten others hast. Wel, I wyl pray for you, that God wyl
unseal your yees, that to long haue bin shut, and do require you
thinke that none shal more joy therat than myselfe, that most I
am sure grives the contrary. Aston hathe told me some of your
request, to wiche I haue made so reasonable answer as in reason
may wel content. Praying God to defend you from all mishap or
treason,
   Your most assured loving sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my right deare brother the king of Skotz. d.
d.

<Q RO1 1593 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 71>
[} [\NO. XLII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\January 1592-3.\]
   My most deare brother, Wondars and marvelles do so assaill my
conceatz, as that the long expecting of your nideful answer to
matters of suche waight as my late lettars caried nides not
seame strange. Thogh I knowe the aught be more regardid, and
spidely performed, yet suche I see the emminent danger and
wel-ny ready approche of your states ruin, your liues peril, and
naighbors wrong, as I may not (to kipe you company) neglect what
I shuld, thogh you forget that you aught. I am sory I am driuen
from warninge to heed, and from to muche trust to seake a tru
way how your dides, not your wordz, may make me assurance that
you be no way gilty
<P 72>
of your owne decay and other danger. Receue, therfor, in short,
what cours I mynd to hold, and how you may make bold of my
unfained loue and euer constant regard.
   You knowe, my deare brother, that, sins you first brethed, I
regarded alwais to conserue hit as my womb hit had bine you
bare. Yea, I withstode the handz and helps of a mighty king to
make you safe, iven gained by the bloud of many my deare
subiectz liues. I made myself the bulwark bitwixt you and your
harmes whan many a wyle was invented to stele you from your
land, and making other posses your soile. Whan your best holdz
wer in my handz, did I retaine them? Nay, I bothe conserved them
and rendred them to you. Could I indure (thogh to my great
expence) that forennars shuld haue foteing in your kingdome,
albeit ther was than some lawfull semblance to make other
suppose (that cared not as I did) that ther was no danger ment?
No. I neuer left til all the Frenche that kept ther life parted
from your soile, and so hit pleased the Hiest to bles me in that
action, as you haue euer sins raigned void of other nation than
your owne. Now, to preserue this, you haue overslipt so many
soundry and dangerous attemps, in nether uniting with them whan
you knewe them, nor cutting them of whan you had them, that if
you hast no bettar now than hiretofor, hit wyl be to late to
helpe whan non shal avale you.
   Let me remember you how wel I was thanked, or he rewarded,
that ons broght all the lettars of all thos wicked conspirators
of the Spanische faction, even the selfe same that yet stil you
haue, to your eminent peril, conserued in ther estates. Was I
not so muche douted as hit was thoght an Italian invention to
make you holde me dearer, and contrived of malice, not don by
cause; and, in that respect, the poore man, that knewe no other
of his taking but as if thiues had assailed him, he most cruelly
soufert so giltles a marterdome as his tormentors douted his
life; so sore had he the bootes, whan the wer ivelworthy life
that bade hit. See what good incouragement I receved for many
wacheful cares for your best safty! Wel, did this so discomfort
my good wyl as, for al this, did I not euer serue for your true
espiall, iven whan you left your land and yours ready, wel-ny,
<P 73>
to receaue suche foraine forsis as the required and wer
promised; wiche, if you had pleased to knowe, was and is to
evident to be proved. But what of all this, if he who most
aught, did naught to assure him, or to requite them?
   Now, of late, by a fortunate good hap, a lewd felowe hathe
bine apprehended with lettars and instructions. I pray God he be
so wel handeled as he may confes all his knowlege in the
Spanische conspiracie, and that you use not this man as slightly
as you don the ringeleaders of this treason. I vowe, if you do
not rake hit to the botome, you wyl verefie what many a wise man
hathe (vewing your procidings) judged of your gilttines of your
owne wrack; with a wining, that the wyl you no harme in inabling
you with so riche a protector, that wyl prove, in the ende, a
destroiar.
   I haue beheld, of late, a strange, dishonorable, and
dangerous pardon, wiche if hit be true, you haue not only
neglected yourselfe but wronged me, that haue to muche procured
your good to be so ivelguerdoned with suche a wrong, as to haue
a fre forgiuenes of aught conspired against my person and estat.
Suppose you, my deare brother, that thes be not rather enseignes
of an enemy than the tast of a frinde? I require, therfor, to al
this, a resolute answer, wiche I chalenge of right, that may be
dides, bothe by spidy apprehension with bisy regard, and not in
sort as publik rumor may precede present action, but rather that
the be intrapped or the do looke therfor; for I may make deme
you wold not haue [{them{] taken, and what wyl folowe than, you
shal see whan lest you looke. Think me, I pray you, not ignorant
what becometh a king to do, and that wyl I never omit; praying
you to trust Bowes in the rest as myselfe. I am ashamed that so
disordard coursis makes my pen excide a lettar, and so drives me
to molest your yees with my to long skribling, and therfor end,
with my ernest prayers to God that he wyl inspire you to do, in
best time, al for your best.
   Your loving affectionat sistar,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] For our deare brother the king of Scotland.

<Q RO1 1593 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 81>
[} [\NO. XLVII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\May 1593.\]
   No sample bettar triar of truthe, my deare beloued brother,
than whan dides dothe give a right sequel to wordes precedant,
the report of wiche profe sins your actions make me, iven in the
last just handeling of that wicked traitor Westmerland, whom
many benefitz of life and lande, besides all other kind and
louinge traictmentz, could neuer let but he wold nides make his
name the first traitor that euer my raigne had; to whom, nether
cause, nor iniury, nor pouerty, nor il vsage, gaue euer shadowe
of mene to moue suche a thoght, but wer hit not that he liueth
by my meanes (whom many wold, for the horror of his fact, or now
haue dispached), (\securus propter contemptum\) , els hit had
not bine possible for him to haue liued to this howre; but I
dout not but your answer to his treasonable lettar wyl make him,
and suche like, knowe that you not only hate the treason, but do
owe as muche to the traitor; and, I assure you, I wil neuer
suffer that this fact of yours shal retourne void, but wil euer
recompence you withe the like, with my million of thankes for
suche kinglike part.
   And, now, I heare that some nobleman hath bine accused of so
<P 82>
horrible a crime as my hart rues to remember. For Godz loue,
look throw no spectacles to your owne safety. Your yees be
younge, you nideth not haue a clere sight in your so nye a
cause, and let your counseil see that you wyl not easely be
begiled in making to smal regard of that wiche toucheth life -
yea, of a king! For overgreat audacitie wyl brede, to a mynde
that may be sone perswaded that all is wel, to do the boldlar a
wicked act. Hard is the skul that may serue in place of suche a
danger, nay hit may bride hit to neglect hit. You haue had many
treasons wiche to tendarly you haue wrapt vp. I pray God the
cindars of suche a fire bride not one day your ruine. God is
witnes I malice none, but for your seurty is only the care of my
writing. I desiar no bloude, but God saue yours. Only this my
long experience teacheth me; whan a king neglectes himself, who
wyl make them enemis for him? Let this serve you for a
(\caveat\) . You wil beare with the fault that affection
commiteth, and use the profit to your best good. For wiche I wyl
euer pray to God, who long defend you from al treachery.
   Your most assured loving sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
   While Bodewel is in this case, give ordar, I beseche you,
that the ordars so wel begone may be perfourmed, and so
continued, and that no man haue rule ther that taketh not to
hart the quiet of bothe realmes.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my deare brother the king of Skotz.

<Q RO1 1593 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 90>
[} [\NO. LI. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\October 1593.\]
   My deare brother, If the variablenis of Skottis affayres had
not invred me with to olde a custom, I shuld neuer leue wondring
at suche strange and vncought actions, but I haue so oft with
careful yees foresine the ivel-comming harmes, and with my
watche for-met
<P 91>
with chifest attemptz, and see them ether not belived or not
redrest, that I wex faint vndar suche burdain, and wery of
fruictles labour. One while, I receue a wright of obliuion and
forgiuenes, than a revocation, with new additions of latelar
consideration; sometimes, some you cal traitors with proclame,
and anone, ther must be no profe allowed, thogh neuer so
apparent, against them. Yea, if one lewd aduocat, perchance
hired for the nonest, dar pronounce a sentence for them, thogh
one of like state denye the same, his word must not take place.
Hit semes a paradoxe to me, that, if of two plaidars one be for
the king, the equal number shal not serue for a king. I muse how
any so lewd a man hathe bine chosen for suche a place, as durst
come in open vew pleade against his mastar. Ther office is, as
to do right so do the soueraine no wronge. If he had douted, as
no honest man could, he ought bine absent rather than ther to
play so vnfitting a part, thogh secretly he had told hit you. He
is happy he is no Englis man. You shuld haue hard other newes of
him than.
   Old Meluin, I perceaue, hathe told you a pece of a tale and
left out the principal. My wordes wer thes: "I heare say the
offending lordz hopes by ther frindz to skape ther paine; I
suppose your king to wise to be so unmindful of his peril to
suffar vnprosecuted suche as wold tral ther country to strangers
curtesy, hauing knowen hit so plain and so long, for this is not
ther first offence. But if his powre serued not to apprehend,
yet to condempne I douted not, for if euer he wold pardon them,
wiche I could hardly counseil, yet I could not thinke without
some obligation to some other prince, that, for ther request, he
wold do hit."
   Now to this great cause that toucheth us bothe so muche.
First, considar of what profession the be; next, to whom the
haue made vowe for religion, the wiche I call christian treason,
under what cloke so neuer. I haue oft told you I was neuer
horsleche for bloude, but rather than your ouer-trust shuld
peril the creditor, I wold wische them ther worst desart. Than
how to credit that so oft hathe deceued? My braines be to shalow
to fadom that botome. How hardly
<P 92>
remedies be aplied to helpe inveteratid maladies! I haue small
skil of suche surgery. In fine, I see nether jugement, counseil,
nor sure affection in so betrayinge advis as to giue your selfe
suche a lasche that the shal be bothe vncondemned and saued.
What thanke may the giue your marcy whan no crime is tried? What
bond shal tye ther profert loyalty if no precedent offencis past
be acknoweleged by confession? Shal the leue to adhere to that
party wiche the neuer made? Or what othe shal be sure to suche
as ther profession skars thinkes lawful for a trust? I vowe to
the liuinge Lord, that no malice to any, nor turbulent spirit,
but your tru seurty and realmes fredom, inforseth my so plain
discours, wiche cannot omit that ther be left so great a blot to
your honor as the receuing them uncondemned to your grace.
   And for Bodwel, Jesus! did euer any muse more than I, that
you could so quietly put up so temerous, indigne, a fact, and
yet by your hand receving assurance that all was pardoned and
finisched. I refer me to my owne lettar what dome I gaue therof.
And now to heare al reuoked, and ether skanted or denied, and
the wheele to turne to as il a spouke. I can say, bad is the
best, but yet of iuelz the lest is [{to{] be taken. And if I wer
in your place, I wold, or he departed, make him try himself no
sutar for ther fauor whos persons let him persecute, so shal you
best knowe him, for ther be liars if depely the have not sought
him or now.
   But that I way most is the smal regard that your sure party
may make [{of{] you, whan the see you adhere to your owne foes,
habandoning the others seruise. I feare me the fame blowes to
fur that you wyl not pursue the side of wiche you be, what so
your wordes do sound. And this conceat may brede, if not
already, more unsound hartz than al the paching of thes bad
matters can worke you pleasure. You ar supposed (I must be
plain, for dissemble I wyl not,) to haue receued this heretical
opinion, that foreign forse shal strengthen you, not indanger
you, and that al thes lordes seake your greatnes not your decay.
O, how wicked sirenes songes! wiche, in first shewe, pleas; in
ende, ruines and destroies. Wax ynough of Godz raison befal
<P 93>
you to resist so distroing aduis, and be so wel lightned as not
so dark a clowde may dim you from the sight of your best good,
wiche cannot be more shunned than by the not yelding to so
betrainge deceat; from the wiche I wil incessantly pray for your
deliuerance. Wisching you many days of raigne, and long.
   Your most assured sistar,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my good brother the king of Scotland.

<Q RO1 1594 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 103>
[} [\NO. LV. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\May 1594.\]
   Thogh by the effectz, I sild see, my good brother, that euer
my aduisis be folowed, yet you haue whitsafed to giue them the
reding I wel understand, having made some of them the theme of
your last, thogh, God knowes, applied fur awry from ther true
sence or right desart; for if I bin in abuse, I claime you the
author of my deceat, in beliving more good than the sequele
hathe told me. For I haue great wronge if you suppose that any
perswation from whomsoeuer can make me haue one iuel opinion of
your actions, if themselues be not the cause. I confes that
diuers be the affections of many men, some to one, some to
another, but my rule of trust shal neuer faile me,
<P 104>
whan it is grounded, not on the sandes of euery mans humor, but
on the stedy rock of approued fact. I shuld condemne my wicked
disposition to founde any amytie promised upon so tikel ground
that others hate might breake the boundz of my loue, and upon
others jugementz to bild my confidence. For Bodwelz bold and
unruly entrance into my bordars, I am so fur from gilt of suche
a faulte, as I protest if I had receaued an answer, in seuentene
wekes space, of my lettar that contained his offer to reveale
unto you the treason of the lordz with forennars, I could sone
haue banished him from thens; and next, he came with your owne
hand to warant that no offence was imputed, wiche made the
borderars readiar to receaue him; but after I had not left
unpunist some of his receatars, I could not haue beliued the
durst haue procurid the pane due for suche desart, and
minde to make them affraid to ventur suche a crime agane; and if
ordar giuen now to all the wardens do not suffice, I vowe ther
bodies and pursis shal wel suffar therfor.
   I wil not troble you with recital of what this gentilman
hathe hard in all the other pointz, but this toucheth me so nere
as I must answer, that my desartz to you haue bine so sincere as
shal neuer nide a threte of hel to her that hathe euer procured
your blis. And, that you may knowe I am that prince that neuer
can indure a menace at my ennemys hand, muche les of one so
dearly traictid, I wyl giue you this bond, that affection and
kind traictement shal euer preuaile, but feare or doute shal
neuer procure aught from me; and do advowe, that if you do aught
by forainers, wiche I knowe in ende worst for yourselfe and
country, hit shal be the worst aide that euer king had, and I
feare may make me do more than you wyl cal back in haste. Deare
brother, use suche a frende, therfor, as she is worthe and giue
her euer cause to remaine suche a one, as her affection hathe
euer merited, whos raschenes is no suche as neglect ther owne so
nere if the wil not forgo ther best and shun ther owne mishaps,
whom non can at my hand procure but your owne factz. Thus,
hoping that this bearar wyl tel you my faithful mening and
sincere
<P 105>
professions, with al the rest that I haue committed to him, I
leue this skribling, besiching God euer more to preserue you.
   Your most affectionate sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To our good brother the king of Skotts.

<Q RO1 1594 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 108>
[} [\NO. LVII. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\October 1594.\]
   My most deare brother, Thogh I wold haue wisched that your
sound counsels oft-giuen you, and my many lettars intercepted
wiche made to plain a shewe of that hye treason that to late you
beliued, might haue prevented your ouer great peril and to muche
hazarde, yet I rejoys with who is most gladlist, that at lengh
(thogh I confes almost to late) hit pleseth you so kingly and
valiantly to resist with your parson ther (\oulter-cuidant\)
malignant attempt, in wiche you haue honord your selfe, reioysed
your frends, and confound, I hope, your proud rebelz. You may
see, my deare brother, what danger it bredes a king to glorifie
to hie and to soudanly a boy of
<P 109>
yeres and counduict, whos untimely age for discretion bredes
rasche consent to undesent actions. Suche speke or the way, and
attempt or the considar. The waight of a kingly state is of more
poix than the shalownis of a rasche yonge mans hed can waigh,
therfor I trust that the causeles zele that you haue borne the
hed of this presumption shal rather cary you to extirpe so
ingratius a roote, in finding so sowre fruite to springe of your
many fauors ivel-acquited, rather than to suffer your goodnis to
be abused with his many skusis for coulors of his good menings.
Though at the first your carire was not the best, yet I hope
your stop will crowne all. If you now do not cut of clerely any
future hope to your nobilitie, through this example, neuer to
combine with forenars, or compact amonge themselues to your
danger, I wowe to God you wyl neuer posses your dignitie long.
Wedes in fildes, if the be suffred, wil quickly ouergrowe the
corne, but subiectz, being dandeled, wil make ther owne raignes,
and for-let an other raigne. My affection to your surty bredes
my plannes, wiche I dout not but by your sower experience you
wil fully beliue hireafter, hauing so lately proued the
sincerite of my dealings. God so prosper me in my affaires as I
maligne none of your subiectz, nor euer wold exaggerat any
matter but for your seurty, whom I mind to take euer as great a
care of as if only the interest of my life and person consisted
theron.
   This gentelman, the lord of Wemes, I find a most careful
subiect of his prince, and one most curius to atcheue as muche
as you committed to him, in wiche I dout not but I haue
satisfied you in honor, as time and comoditie serue, with wiche
I wil not molest you more than refer me to his declaration, with
this only, that no one answer to al but procideth from a most
parfaict good affection toward you, and so I desire, with most
affection, that you interprete hit.
   I must not omit, for conscience sake, to speke a few wordz of
the mastar of Gray, with whom I haue had long discours, in wiche
I find him the most gridiest to do you acceptable seruise that I
haue euer hard any, and dothe lay none of his disgracis,
banismentz, nor los, in any part to you, but only to perswations
of suche as ment his ruine,
<P 110>
and hopes, with his good indeuors, to merite your formar grace;
and for my owne [{part{] , I am nothing partiall to him for his
particular, but this I must confes, being as honest as he is
sufficient, I thinke your realme possesseth not his secound. I
nowe speake upon my knowelege, therfor lose not so good an
instrument for your affaires, if you knowe no more against him
than I can lerne. You will pardon my audacious writing, as one
whos yeres teacheth more than her wit, neuer ceasing to lift up
my handes and hart with deuout [{prayers{] for your most
prosperous safe and sure succes in this voiage, for which I haue
sent you but to pay for hors-mete.
   Your most affectionat louing sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.
[\ADDRESSED,\] To my deere brother the king of Scotland.

<Q RO1 1596 ELIZABETH1>
<A QUEEN ELIZABETH>
<G F>
<P 112>
[} [\NO. LIX. ELIZABETH TO JAMES.\] }] 
[\January or February 1595-6.\]
   My deare brother, If the wracked state, and wel-ny ruined, of
this poore gentylman, through the faitheles trust of desceving
servantz, in looking every wike of the ending of his troubles,
[{had not occasioned me to delay,{] I could not haue left my pen
so long dry, but wold haue fild hit to you with matter ful of
truthe, and memorialz of my cares, wiche neuer ar at rest for
your best avail, and ment to warne you of suche occurrance as
other nations afourd me; spetially, suche as might touche the
safty of our countryes, and honors of ourselves. Althogh I do
not dout, as now I do perceaue, that you shuld think them now
overstale for newes, being by good espialz not made ignorant of
our ennemis driftz, whos skope haue ther boundz while ether
liues in raigne, but the ever-guidar of best actions, and
readiest ruinar of wicked actes, wyl, I doute not, coule ther
heat, abate ther pride, and confounde ther forse. I am not suche
a wekely, nor
<P 113>
of so base a courage, that euer I mene breake one slombar for
ther malice, nor ons dreame of ther victoiri, whos ground-worke
is of so slippar foundation that the hold of suche edefice wyl
be overturnd with his owne gilt. I may not deny but Epimetheus
is no companion for a king. With Prometheus, therfor, I mynd to
folowe that after wische condemne not for iugement, and
therafter prepare suche menes and power, that, I feare not, shal
be so marshald as shal make us no skorne to the world, nor
delite to our foes; in some suche sort as I here you haue
begone; whos praise, if I shuld not lessene in praising, I could
more delate, but this muche I must tel you, that I cannot imagin
how you could by any more glorious menes set out your care for
your land, your loue to your neigbors, your hate to suche
wrongeful invadars, than with your pen and charge to your
subiectz you haue utterd, in wordz of suche effect and matter,
of suche waight, as, in honest dimars, hit may mar the facon [^A
CEDILLA ON THE C IN THE PREVIOUS WORD^] of diuelische machines,
and crase the hartz of treason-mynding men. In me, hit hathe set
a deape impression of a cousin-like zele, that myxith not his
los with her decay, and joyeth not that she shuld perische
first, in hope of bettar fare; wiche, as hit is euer unsure, so
sild is hit not a winde-shaked blast. But your so spedy care for
thretes, that the may not arive to dedes, doth assure me that
the shal haue no just cause that shuld make suche a skruple.
Receve, therfor, deare brother, bothe my censare and my thankes
therfor, as she that wyl not suffar you to go one fote beyond
her in busy inquiring and narow serching what fitteth best for
my counsel, or my warning for that may conserne your safety or
estate, as I haue charged this my embassador to tel you more at
length, as time and cause shal invite me, not omitting to
beseche you, that as I knowe him most obsequious in aught that
may conserne you, so hit wyl please you to shadow him with your
grace against the spiritz of suche as may fortune envie him but
shal never mache him. Thus I end my tedious skribling, wiche you
wil the rather pardon for to recompence the
<P 114>
long space that my writing hathe not spoken with you, praying
the euer-liuing God euer to preserue you from sinistar counsel,
and al good elz may euer befal you may prosper.
   Your most affectionat sistar and cousin,
   Elizabeth R.

<B ORIGINA3>

[^ORIGINAL LETTERS, ILLUSTRATIVE OF ENGLISH HISTORY; INCLUDING
NUMEROUS ROYAL LETTERS: FROM AUTOGRAPHS IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM,
AND ONE OR TWO OTHER COLLECTIONS. VOL III. 2ND EDITION. ED. BY
ELLIS, HENRY. LONDON: HARDING, TRIPHOOK, AND LEPARD. 1825.^]

<Q OR3 1580S? W1FLEETWOOD>
<A WILLIAM FLEETWOOD 1>
<G M>
ыфвап
<P 30>
[} [\LETTER CCXXIX. SERJ=T=. FLETEWOOD RECORDER OF LONDON, TO
LORD BURGHLEY.\] }]
   My very good Lord, yesterday I sent your Lordship a Letter
towchinge the admission of my Lord chieff Justice in to the
Comen Place; but my man finding not your Lordship in the Court
retorned the Letters to me agayne.
   This present Sundaye my Lord Maior was presented,
<P 31>
where her Maiestie most gratiouslie accepted of my Lord, and of
my folishe speache, to the great comforth of my Lord Maior and
of all his bretherne the Aldermen.
   Her Maiestie was wonderfully well pleased in all things,
savinge for that some yonge gentilmen beinge more bold then well
manered, did stand upon the Carpett of the Clothe of Estate, and
did allmost leane upon the Quesions. Her Highness found falt
with My Lord Chamberlain and M=r= Vizchamb. and with the
gentelmen ushers, for suffering suche disorders. Her Majestie
found fault with me for geving more praises unto her Highnes as
towching the avaunsement of Religion then, as she said, she
deserved; but my good Lord, I said nothing but truly and iustlie
as it was indeed. My Lord Chamberlain made my Lord Maior Knight;
my lord kyssed her Highnes hand, and sone departed. There wanted
your Lordship, my lord Admirall, my lord of Leic. my lord of
Hunsdon, M=r=. Secretarie, and other great persones. [^PASSAGE
OMITTED^]
   Our Lord Jesus blesse your Lordship, and send your Lordship
helthe; this present Sundaye.
   Your good Lordship's most bounden
   W. Fletewood.
   To the right honorable & my singuler good Lord my Lord
Treasorer.

<Q OR3 1594 ERUSSEL>
<A ELIZABETH RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 40>
[} [\LETTER CCXXXIII. ELIZABETH DOWAGER LADY RUSSEL TO LORD
CECIL; A.D.1594.\] }]
   God comfort you, my Lord, when you woold as it pleased your
Lordship to comfort my daunted spiritts which were so changed
therby and sturred upp by your Lordships so honorable most kynde
and unloked for visitacion, as turned melancoly into a sanguin.
My Lord in trawth I am weak. Heat in the forpart of my hed
unfaynedly, with shooting payen, and swimming brayne, maketh me,
on my fayth, to feare a sodayne death, like to the Erle Dorset.
Suer I am that I slepe litle, eate less, nor drank a draught of
ale, bere or wyne sins my comming to Windsor, but water and
limmons, by phisitions advise. But in trawth I had clymed up and
stoode from your Lordship's comming in, to your going owt, which
made me faynt and sweat truly. Thus muche have I troobled your
Lordship becawse I woold not willingly deserve to be thought a
dissembler or ipperitt. Becawse I here your Lordship meaneth to
be gon early in the morning, I am bowld to send your pale thin
checks a comfortable litle breckfast agaynst the contagion of
this tyme. 
<P 41>
God bless yow, with the continuance of all helth and happiness
as I woold to myself unfaynedly. 
   Your Lordships owld Awnt, of compleate lxviij yeres, that
will pray for your long lyfe
   Elizabeth Russel (^douager^) .

<Q OR3 1597 RCECIL>
<A SIR ROBERT CECIL>
<G M>
<P 41>
[} [\LETTER CCXXXIV. SIR ROBERT CECIL TO THE EARL OF ESSEX.\] }]
   My good lord
   By a Letter of yours, written on Saterday, what howre I know
not, your Lordship seemeth not to conceave what might be the
reason that things runne
<P 42>
on by us with so great silence; wherein that you may see the
poore unfortunate Secretarie will leave no scrupule in you of
lack of industry, to yeald you all satisfaction, (whome it were
inhumanitie to neglecte, the circumstances considered of your
cares and toiles, which have much of their dependencie upon the
breath of this place,) I have thought good to yeald you reason
for all, by drawing you to make your owne computations. Tyll
Fryday in the morning wee heard nothing of your safe arrivall,
of which, to tell you true, tyll I was well advertised, I tooke
little pleasure to thinke of aunswering the Remaine, but wished
the Action dissolved, and knewe, yf you had perished, it hath
ben a vanitie to have dreamed any further, of ought els but
passion here, and confusion there. And for good M=r=. Ralegh,
who wonders at his owne diligence (because diligence and he are
not familiars), it is true, that on Wednesday night, I being at
Greenwich, and the Queen at M=r=. Walsinghams, his Letter found
me, which I imparted on Thursday, as soone as the Queene was
readie, unto her; and do confesse, that in expectation to heare
of you, wee did differe aunswer to you untill Fryday, of which
day, I trust, divers dispatches are with you long before this
tyme. Thus do you see that a man, whose fortunes scants him of
meanes to do you service, will not beare coales to be accused of
dulnes,
<P 43>
especially by your rere-admirall, who making haste but once in a
yeare to write a lettre in post, gave date from Waymouth to his
last dispatche, which by the circumstances I knew was written
from Plymouth.
   But now, My Lord, after this longe preface, lett me take a
little tyme for you with that, which I assure you would have
pleased you, if you had ben a beholder.
   There arrived three daies since in the Cittie an Ambassador
out of Poland, a gentleman of excellent fashion, witte,
discourse, language, and person; the Queene was possessed by
some of our new Counsellours, that are as cunning in
intelligence as in decyphering, that his negotiation tendeth to
a proposition of peace. Her Majesty, in respect that his father
the Duke of Finland had so much honored her, besydes the lyking
she had of this gentlemans commelines and qualities brought to
her by reporte, did resolve to receave him publickly in the
Chamber of Presence, where most of the Erles and Noblemen about
the Court attended, and made it a great day. He was brought in
attired in a longe robe of black velvett, well jeweld and
buttond, and came to kisse her Ma=ts=. hands where she stood
under the State, from whence he straight retired, tenne yardes
of, and then begonne his Oration aloude in Latin, with such a
gallant countenance, as in my lyfe I never behelde. The effect
of it was this: that "the King hath sent him to putt her
Ma=tie=. in minde of the auncient confederacies betweene
<P 44>
the Kings of Poland and England; that never a Monarche in Europe
did willinglie neglect their frendship; that he had ever
frendlie receaved her merchants and subjects of all qualitie;
that she had suffered his to be spoiled without restitution, not
for lacke of knowledge of the violencies, but out of meer
injustice, not caring to minister remedie, notwithstanding many
particular petitions and letters receaved; and to confirme hir
dispositon to avowe these courses (violating both the Law of
Nature and Nations) because ther were quarels between her and
the King of Spaine, she therfor tooke upon her, by mandat, to
prohibite him and his Countreis, assuming therby to her self a
superioritie (not tollerable) over other Princes; nor he
determined to endure; but rather wished her to knowe, that yf
there were no more then the auncient amitie between Spaine and
him, it were no reason to looke that his subjects should be
impedited, much lesse now, when a strickt obligation of bloud
had so conjoyned him with the illustrious howse of Austria:"
concluding, that, "if her Ma=tie= would not reforme it, he
would."
   To this I sweare by the living God, that her Ma=tie=. made
one of the best aunswers (\ex tempore\) , in Latin, that ever I
heard, being much mooved to be so challenged in publick,
especially so much against her expectation. The wordes of her
beginning were these, " (\Expectavi Legationem, mihi vero
Querelam adduxisti\) ; is this the busynes your King hath sent
you
<P 45>
about! suerlie I can hardlie beleeve, that yf the King himself
were present, he would have used such a language, for yf he
should, I must have thought that his being a King not of many
yeares, and that (\non de jure sanguinis, sed de jure
electionis, imo noviter electus\) , may happilie leave him
uninformed of that course which his father and auncestors have
taken with us, and which peradventure shalbe observed by those
that shall live to come after him. And as for you (saied she to
the Ambassador) although I perceave you have redde many books to
fortifie your arguments in this case, yet am I apt to beleeve
that you have not lighted upon the Chapter that prescribeth the
forme to be used between Kings and Princes; but were it not for
the place you hold, to have so publicly an imputation throwne
upon our Justice, which as yet never failed, wee would aunswer
this audacitie of yours in another style. And for the
particulars of your Negotiations, wee will appoint some of our
Counsell to conferre with you to see upon what ground this
clamor of yours hath his foundacion, who have shewed your self
rather an Heralde then an Ambassador."
   I assure your Lordship though I am not apt to wonder, I must
confesse before the living Lord that I never heard her (when I
know her spirits were in passion) speake with better moderation
in my lyfe.
   You will thinke it strange that I am thus idle as to use an
other bodies hand. I assure you I have harte
<P 46>
my thumme at this hower; and because the Queene tould me she was
sorrye you heard not his Latin and hers, I promised her to make
you partaker of as much as I could remember, being as I knew the
worst you would expect from her, and yet the best could come
from any other. Yf therfore this my Lettre finde you, and that
you write backe before your going, I pray you take notice that
you were pleased to heare of her wise and eloquent aunswer.
   I am half ashamed to take thus much tyme from you, but when I
hope it shalbe the last which shal come to you before you goe
out of England, I am contented in this to be censured idle,
though, in all things els upon the face of the earth, I wilbe
founde
   Your faithfull and affectionate poore frende, to doe you
service [\...\]
   From the Court at Grenwich the 26 of July 1597.

<Q OR3 1600? FDEVEREUX>
<A FRANCES DEVEREUX>
<G F>
<P 55>
[} [\LETTER CCXXXVII. THE COUNTESS OF ESSEX TO MR SECRETARY
CECIL.\] }]
<P 56>
   Sir
   Although the awnswere I receved from you two daies since gave
mee small incouragement to flatter my self that anie importunity
I could make should bee able to appease the scandall you had
conceaved to bee geven you by my unfortunat husband: yet hade it
not pleased God to powre uppon mee one affliction 
<P 57>
after an other, and to add to the immesurable sorrowes of my
harte so violent a sicknes as I am not able of my self to stur
out of my bed, I had presented unto your vew the image of the
importunante Widow mentioned in the Scriptur, and had never
ceased to pester you with my complaines till you had afforded me
some assurance that, whatsoever respects might dehorte you from
so much as wishinge my husband's good, yet that an afflicted and
wofull lady should not wholly loose her labor, or returne
desperate of such comforts at the last yeare you so honorably
ministred unto mee in a great affliction though differinge from
this in qualitie. As I receaved then such noble curtesies from
you as must never bee forgotten; so bee perswaded, I beseech
you, that whatsoever new favor you shall now be pleased to add
to the old, shall so binde mee to reverence of your vertues as I
will resolve to recken my self a bankerout till I have yeelddid
some demonstrative testimonie of the best thankfullness that the
honestest harte can expresse for the worthest benefitt.
Honorable Sir, I know there bee private causes to discourage mee
from movinge you heerin: yet, seeinge the highest providence
hath placed you in a callinge most propper to bee a mene for my
comforte, and that former experiance hath tought me that you are
rather inclyned to doe good then to looke allway to private
interest, I beseech you, even for your vertues sake, performe
this noble office for mee as to joyne with the rest of your 
<P 58>
LL=ps=. of the Councell in presentinge my humblest supplicacion
to her Majestie. Bere Sir, I pray you, with theise tedious
blotts from her feeble hand and sad sick harte that is stored
with much thankfullness and infinite best wishes unto you, who
will ever rest
   Your most beeholdinge poore
   distressed frend
   fra: Essex
   And M=r= Secretary even as you desire of God that your owne
sonne never bee made orphane by the untimely or unnaturall death
of his deere father, vouchsafe a relentinge to the not urginge
if you may not to the hindringe of that fatell warrant for
Execution, which if it bee once signed I shall never wish to
breath one howre after.
   To the right honorable
   M=r=. Secretary Cecill.

<Q OR3 1600S BELIZABETH>
<A ELIZABETH OF BOHEMIA>
<G F>
<P 89>
[} [\LETTER CCXLVIII. THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH, TO HER BROTHER
PRINCE HENRY.\] }]
   My most worthy and dearest Brother: I geve you a million of
thankes for the servant you sent mee, but
<P 90>
more for your kinde Letter, takyng few thinges so joyfully as to
hear of your health, and though I cannot requite you with so
pleasant a token, yet are these few lines a testymony of the
affection of her whome you shall ever constantly finde
   Yo=r= most loving sister
   Elizabeth.
To my good brother the Prince.

<Q OR3 1600S BELIZABETH>
<A ELIZABETH OF BOHEMIA>
<G F>
<P 90>
[} [\LETTER CCXLIX. THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH TO PRINCE HENRY.\] }]
   Worthy Prince and my dearest brother:
   I received your most welcom Letter and kynd token by M=r=.
Hopkins, highly esteeming them as delightfull memorialls of your
brotherly love. In which assuredly (whatsoever ells may fayle) I
will ever endevor to equall you, esteeming that time happiest
when I enjoyed your company, and desiring nothing more than the
fruition of it again: that as nature hath made us neerest in our
love together, so accident might not separate us from living
together. Neither do I account yt the leste part of my present
comfort, that though I am deprived of your happy presence, yet I
can make 
<P 91>
these lines deliver this true message, that I will ever bee
during my lyfe
   Your most kinde
   and loving syster
   Elizabeth.
To my most dear brother the Prince.

<Q OR3 1610? CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 92>
[} [\LETTER CCLII. CHARLES DUKE OF YORK, TO PRINCE HENRY.\] }]
   Sir
   Please your H. your trustie Douglas will witnes what sport I
have. He will acquaint you with
<P 93>
my sutte, which I pray you moove to his M. So kissing your
handes I rest
   Your H. most duetiefull
   York.
To his Hienesse.

<Q OR3 1610? CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 93>
[} [\LETTER CCLIII. THE DUKE OF YORK TO PRINCE HENRY.\] }]
   Good brother, I hope you are in good helth and merry, as I
am, God be thanked. In your absence I visit somtimes your
stable, and ride your great horses, that at your return I may
wait on you in that noble exercise. So committing you to God, I
rest
   Your loving and dutifull brother
   York.
To my brother the Prince.

<Q OR3 1608 HSTUART>
<A HENRY STUART>
<G M>
<P 93>
[} [\LETTER CCLIV. HENRY PRINCE OF WALES TO KING JAMES THE
FIRST.\] }]
   Please yo=r= Ma=tie=
   I am glad to have heard of your Ma=ties= recovery, before I
understood of your distemper by the heat of the weather. I have
sent this bearer of purpose, to
<P 94>
returne word of yo=r= Ma. good health, which I beseech God long
to continew, as also to remember my most humble duety. He is
lykewyse to acquaint yo=r= Ma=tie= that Mons=r=. le Grand hath
sent me a horse by a French gentleman, wherewith I hope yo=r=
Ma=tie= will be well pleased. The nexte Weeke I meane to use the
benefit of yo=r= Ma=ties=. gratious favour of hunting in Waltham
forrest, the place appointed as fittest for the sport being
Wansted. In the mean whyle, and after, I will employ my tyme at
my booke the best I can to your Ma=ties=. satisfaction, whereof
hoping your Ma=tie= will rest assured I kisse most humbly your
hands as 
   Yo=r= Ma. most dutifull and obedient sonne.
   Agust 1608.

<Q OR3 1610? CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 94>
[} [\LETTER CCLV. THE DUKE OF YORK TO PRINCE HENRY.\] }]
   Sir
   Pleas your H. I doe keepe your haires in breath (and I have
very good sport) I doe wish the King and you might see it. So
longing to see you, I kisse your hands, and rest
   Yours to be commanded
   York.
My maydes service to you.
To his Hienesse.

<Q OR3 1612 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 96>
[} [\LETTER CCLVIII. CHARLES DUKE OF YORK TO THE PRINCE.\] }]
   Most loving Brother I long to see you, and hope that you will
returne shortly, therfore I have presumed to wreat these few
lynes to You that I may rest in your favour and ever bee thought
   Your H. most loving brother and obedient servant
   Charles.
   S=t=. James 14. Mar. 1611.
To his Highness.

<Q OR3 1613 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 102>
[} [\LETTER CCLXIV. PRINCE CHARLES TO KING JAMES THE FIRST.\] }]
   Sir
   I cannot exprese the thankes I owe to so good a Father, first
in showing my fault so rivelie, and then in forgiving my fault
so frilie: albeit I cannot love and honnor youre Ma=tie= more
then I did, yet this shall learne me heerafter not to be so
foulish as to sende anie sutche message as shall beare anie
comment but my owen, which shall be as full of love and respect
as a dewtifull sone can owe to so loving a Father, thinking I
shall prosper no longer then I deserve to be cald 
   Your M=ties= most humble and obedient sone and servant
   Charles.
   S=t=. James the 11 of March 1612
To the King's M=tie=.

<Q OR3 1610S CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 102>
[} [\LETTER CCLXV. PRINCE CHARLES TO LORD VILLIERS.\] }]
   Steenie
   Ther is none that knowes me so well as yourselfe, what
dewtiefull respect and love I have ever, and
<P 103>
shall ever carrie to Kinge: and therfor ye may juge what greefe
it is to me to have the ill fortune as that anie of my actions
should beare so ill an interpretation as I fynd by your Letter
this message I sent by my Lo. Mongomerie has borne. I will no
wais stand upon my justification, but desyre that my good
meaning may be taken insted of the ill message. That which made
me thinke that this message would not displease the King, was
the command ye know he gave a good whyle ago that I should use
all the menes I could to make the Queene make a will, wherby she
should make over to me her Jewels: therfor I sent to have Kings
aprobation of that which I thought he had desyred, and therfore
I thought he would eather be glad then anie way displeased with
the message; my meaning was never to clame anie thing as of
right, but to submit my selfe as wel in this as in all other
things to the King's pleasure. It doth greeve me much, that the
King should be so much mouved with it as you say he is, for the
least show of his displeasure would make me leave to medle, or
thinke of anie such thing anie more, without showing himselfe
openlie so angrie with me. To conclude, I pray you to commend my
most humble service to his M=tie= and tel him that I am verri
sorri that I have done anie thing may offend him, and that I
will be content to have anie pennance inflicted upon me so he
may forgive me, althought I had never
<P 104>
a thought nor never shall have to displease him, yet I deserve
to be punniched for my ill fortune. So hoping never to have
occasion to wryt to you of so ill a subject againe, but of manie
better, I rest
   Your treu constant loving frend
   Charles P.
   I had written to the King before I receaved yours, but I hope
you will mende anie thing that is amisse in the other with this
for I did not thinke the Kinge had beene so angrie before I
receaved yours.

<Q OR3 1623 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 121>
[} [\LETTER CCLXXIV. PRINCE CHARLES AND THE MARQUIS OF
BUCKINGHAM WHILE INCOGNITO AT PARIS, TO THE KING.\] }]
   Sir
   Since the closing of our last we have beene at Court againe,
(and that we might not houd you in paine, we assure you that we
have not been knowen,)
<P 122>
where we saw the young Queene, littell Monsieur, and Madame, at
the practising of a Maske that is intended by the Queene to be
presented to the Kinge, and in it ther danced the Queene and
Madame with as manie as made up nineteen faire dancing Ladies,
amongst which the Queene is the handsomest, which hath wrought
in me a greater desier to see her sister. So in haste, going to
bed, we humblie take our leaves and rest
   Your Majestie's most humble and obedient sone and servant
   Charles:
Paris the 22 of Feb. 1622/3.
[\POSTSCRIPT IN THE MARQUIS OF BUCKINGHAM'S HAND-WRITING
OMITTED.\]

<Q OR3 1623 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 145>
[} [\LETTER CCLXXXVI. PRINCE CHARLES AND THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
TO KING JAMES.\] }] 
   Sir
   I confess that ye have sent mor jewels then (at my departure)
I thought to had use of; but, since my cumming, seeing manie
jewels worne heere, and that my braverie can consist of nothing
else, besydes that sume of them which ye have appointed me to
give to the Infanta, in Steenies oppinion and myne, ar nott fitt
to be given to her; therfor I have taken this bouldness to
intreate your Majesty to send more for my owen wearing, and for
giving to my Mistres: in which I thinke Your Majesty shall not
doe amiss to take Carlile's advyce. So humblie craving your
blessing I rest
   Your Majesty's humble and obedient sone and servant
   Charles.

<Q OR3 1623 G1VILLIERS>
<A GEORGE VILLIERS 1>
<G M>
<P 145>
[^THE POSTSCRIPT FROM LETTER CCLXXXVI TO KING JAMES^]
   I your Doge, sayes you have manie jewels neyther fitt for
your one, your sones, nor your daughters wering, but verie fitt
to bestow of those here who must necessarilie have presents; and
this way will be least chargable to your Majesty in my poure
opinion.
   Madrill the 22 of Aprill 1623.

<Q OR3 1623 G1VILLIERS>
<A GEORGE VILLIERS 1>
<G M>
<P 146>
[} [\LETTER CCLXXXVII. THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM TO THE KING.\] }] 
   Dere Dad, Gossope and Steward
   Though your babie himselfe hath sent word what neede he hath
of more jewells, yet will I by this berer, who can make more
speede then Carlile, againe acquaint your Majesty therewith, and
give my poure and sausie opinion what will be fittest more to
send. Hetherto you have bine so spareing that whereas you
thought to have sent him sufficiently for his one wareing, to
present his Mistris who I ame sure shall shortlie now louse that
title, and to lend me, that I to the contrarie have bine forsed
to lend him. You neede not aske who made me able to do it. Sir,
he hath neyther chaine nor hattband; and I beseech you consider
first how rich they are in jewells here, then in what a poure
equipage he came in, how he hath no other meanes to appere like
a Kings sonne, how they are usefullests at such a time as this
when they may doe your selfe, your sone, and the nation honor,
and
<P 147>
lastlie how it will neyther caust nor hasard you anie thinge.
These resons, I hope, since you have ventured allredie your
cheefest jewell your Sonne, will serve to perswade you to lett
louse thesse more after him: first your best hattband; the
Portingall diamond; the rest of the pendant diamonds, to make up
a Necles to give his Mistris; and the best rope of perle; with a
rich chaine or tow for himself to waire, or els your Doge must
want a coller; which is the redie way to put him into it. There
are manie other jewells which are of so mean qualitie as they
deserve not that name, but will save much in your purs and serve
verie well for Presents. They had never so good and greate an
occasion to take the aire out of there boxes as at this time.
God knowes when they shall have such another: and they had neede
some times to get nerer the Sonne to continue them in there
perfection. Here give me leave humbly on my knees to give your
Majesty thankes for that rich jewell you sent me in a box by my
lord Vahan, and give him leave to kiss your hands from me who
tooke the paines to draw it. My reward to him is this, he spent
his time well, which is the thinge wee should all most desier,
and is the glorie I covett most here in your service, which
sweet Jesus grant me, and your blessing.
   Your Majesty's most humble slave and doge
   Steenie.
Madrill the 25 of Aprill 1623.
<P 148>
   Sir
   Foure Asses you I have sent. Tow hees and tow shees. Five
Cameles, tow hees, tow shees, with a young one; and one
Ellefant, which is worth your seeing. Thees I have impudentlie
begged for you. There is a Barbarie hors comes with them, I
think from Watt Aston. My Lord Bristow sayeth he will send you
more Camells. When wee come oure selves wee will bringe you
Horses and Asses anoufe. If I may know whether you desier Mules
or not, I will bringe them, or Dere of this Cuntrie eyther. And
I will lay waite for all the rare coler burds that can be hard
of. But if you doe not send your babie jewels eneugh I'le stope
all other presents. Therfore louke to it.

<Q OR3 1623 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 148>
[} [\LETTER CCLXXXVIII. PRINCE CHARLES TO THE KING.\] }] 
   Sir
   Steenie and I doe thinke it necessarie that Bristo should
stay heer behynd us, for wee cannot see how the businesses of
frendship (as they call it)
<P 149>
can be ended, without eather his stay or ours, and we thinke
that they cannot choose but a great whyle of treating: for that
of the Palatinat onlie will take up at least two monthes for the
perfyting of it: besydes your Majesty knowes ther ar manie other
businesses of great consequence which must requyre tyme: and if
wee should goe away without leaving somboddie behynd us to end
them (and your Majisty knowes ther is noboddie so fitt for this
as Bristo) they may justlie thinke that I cam onlie for a
Marriage and not for a frendship. Wherfor since his stay will
make our happiness of kissing your Majesty's hands to be the
sooner, I hope ye will not onlie give him leave, but command him
to obey us in this. So humblie craving your Majesty's blessinge
I rest
   Your Majesty's humble and obedient sone and servant
   Charles.
Madrill the 25 of Aprill 1623.

<Q OR3 1620S CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 167>
[} [\LETTER CCXCIX. PRINCE CHARLES TO THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.\]
}] 
   Steenie
   First I must thanke you for the token you sent me, then that
you imployed so good a Secretaire to answer my letter. Now I
must crave your pardon to truble you a little: and it is this;
Bristo stands upon his justification, and will by no means
accept of my councells; the King does hait to have him cum to
his tryall, and I am affeard that if you be not with us to helpe
to charge him, and to set the King right, he may escape with too
slight a sencure; therfor I would have you send to the King to
put of Bristoe's tryall untill you might waite on him: but for
God's sake doe not venter
<P 168>
to cum suner then ye may with the saftie of your health; and
with that condition, the suner the better. If ye will answer me,
truble not your selfe, but doe it by the Secretaire ye used
last. Take care of your selfe for my sake, who is and ever shall
be 
   Your treu, loving, constante frend
   Charles P.

<Q OR3 1625? G1VILLIERS>
<A GEORGE VILLIERS 1>
<G M>
<P 179>
[} [\LETTER CCCIII. THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM TO THE EARL OF
NEADSDALE.\] }] 
   My noble Lord
   His Majesty hath commanded me to acquaint your Lordship that
he hath prorogued his Parliament untill the sixteenth day of
Februarie for manie waightie
<P 180>
considerations, but principally this, that the respect of the
Princesse of France and the reverence which will be given to her
person when shee shall be here for those graces and virtues that
shine in her, as likewise for the love and dutie borne to the
Prince being all joyned in her, will not only stay the
exorbitant or ingentle motions that might otherwise bee made in
the House of Parliament, but will facilitate in his Majesties
proceeding those passages of favors, grace, and goodnes which
his Majesty hath promised for the ease of the Romaine
Catholickes, not merelie in contemplation of that incomparable
Ladie and his dere brother, but as the gentleman that was sent
latlie here from you can bere wittnes, with a desier worthie the
cherishing, to make a beginning of a straighter correspondence
betweene him you went to, then could be hoped for these manie
yeres past. Besides, you may be pleased to lay before him I
forbeare to name (wanting a Sifer) the obligation which must
fall upon the Prince in a thinge which though it be to them but
a circumstance of time, yet to him an essential favor, being
pasionatelie in love: and, amongst Princes and generous
spiritts, things themselves take not so much
<P 181>
as the maner they are done with: therefore I conjure You as a
worke of more consequence then can at the first view be
conceived, to use all possible diligences that where you are,
there be used no delays nor interruptions to hinder the speedy
dispaching of the Dispensation, which worke I hope will not be
hard, since I trust before this time that jentlemans dispatch
make you plainelie perseve that his Majesty hath left nothing
undone on his part both to facilitate and hasten a happie end to
this great busines which will make a good entrie to a greater
good in Christendom. Thus leveing you to the protection of the
Almightie I end.
   Your Lordship's affectionate kinsman and humble Servant
   G. Buckingham.
   I hope the next news I shall here from you will bee you have
done your errant, recovered your health, and on your way
homwards.
   For the right honorable The Erle of Neadsdale.

<Q OR3 1625 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 210>
[} [\LETTER CCCXIX. KING CHARLES I=ST= TO THE DUKE OF
BUCKINGHAM.\] }] 
   Steenie
   I writt to you by Ned Clarke that I thought I would have
cause anufe in shorte tyme to put away the Monsers, ether by
atemting to steale away my Wyfe, or by making plots with my owen
subjects. For the first I cannot say certainlie whether it was
intended, but I am sure it is hindered; for the other,
<P 211>
though I have good grounds to belife it, and am still hunting
after it, yet seing daylie the malitiusness of the Monsers, by
making and fomenting discontentments in my Wyfe, I could tarie
no longer from adverticing of You, that I meane to seeke for no
other grounds to casier my Monsers, having for this porpose sent
you this other letter that you may if you thinke good, advertise
the Queene Mother with my intention, for this being an action
that may have a show of harshness I thought it was fitt to take
this way, that she to whome I have hade manie obligations may
not take it unkyndlie, and lykwayes I thinke I have done you no
wrong in my letter though in some place of it I may seeme to
chyde you. I pray you send mee word with what speed you may,
whither ye lyke this cource or not, for I shall put nothing of
this in exsecution while I heere frome you: in the meane tyme, I
shall thinke of the convenients meanes to doe this business with
the best mind, but I am resolute: it must be done and that
shortlie. So, longing to see thee, I rest
   Your loving, faithfull,
   constante frend
   Charles R.
Hampton Courte the 20=th= of November 1625.

<Q OR3 1626 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 244>
[} [\LETTER CCCXXXII. THE KING TO THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.\] }] 
   Steenie
   I have receaved your Letter by Dic Greame, this is my Answer.
I command you to send all the French away to morrow out of the
Toune. If you can, by faire meanes (but stike not longe in
disputing) otherways force them away, dryving them away lyke so
manie wyld beastes untill ye have shipped them, and so the
Devill goe with them. Lett me heare no answer bot of the
performance of my command. So I rest
   Your faithfull constant loving frend
   Charles R.
Oaking, the 7=th=. of Agust 1626.

<Q OR3 1626 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 249>
[} [\LETTER CCCXXXV. KING CHARLES TO THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM\] }]
   Steenie
   I send you heerwith Letters to my Sister and Brother (I place
them so, becaus I thinke the gray Meare is the best horse). As
for Newes I can say but litell yet, Yrland being the onlie Egg
we have yet sitten upon, and having a thike shell wee have not
yet hached it. For Blenuill he hes yet but made his formale
demands concerning the Ships, to which he has a delatorie answer
while we heere from France concerning
<P 250>
the restitution of oure Ships. This is all I have to say to thee
at this tyme, but that that I shall ever say and thinke, that I
ame and ever will be
   Your faithfull loving constant frend
   Charles R.
For Yourself.

<Q OR3 1628 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 253>
[} [\LETTER CCCXXXIX. THE KING TO THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.\] }] 
   Buckingham I command You to draw my Armie together to
Porchemouth, to the end I may send them speedli to Rochell. I
shall send after you directions how and whaire to billett them,
untill the tyme that ye will be able to shipp them; for the
doing whairof, this shall be your sufficient warrant, it being
the command of
   Your louing faithfull constant frend
   Charles R.
Whithall, the 6=th= of June 1628.

<Q OR3 1628 DCARLETON>
<A DUDLEY CARLETON>
<G M>
<P 254>
[} [\LETTER CCCXL. DUDLEY LORD CARLETON TO THE QUEEN.\] }] 
<P 256>
   Maddam
   I am to trouble your Grace, with a most Lamentable Relation;
This day betwixt nine and ten of the clock in the morning, the
Duke of Buckingham then comming out of a Parlor, into a Hall, to
goe to his coach and soe to the King, (who was four miles of)
having about him diverse Lords, Colonells, and Captains, & many
of his owne Servants, was by one Felton (once a Lieutenant of
this our Army) slaine at one blow, with a dagger-knife. In his
staggering he turn'd about, uttering onely this word,
"Villaine!" & never spake word more, but presently plucking out
the knife from himselfe, before he fell to the ground, hee made
towards the Traytor, two or three paces, and then fell against a
Table although he were upheld
<P 257>
by diverse that were neere him, that (through the villaines
close carriage in the act) could not perceive him hurt at all,
but guess'd him to be suddenly oversway'd with some apoplexie,
till they saw the blood come gushing from his mouth and the
wound, soe fast, that life, and breath, at once left his begored
body.
   Maddam, you may easily guesse what outcryes were then made,
by us that were Commaunders and Officers there present, when wee
saw him thus dead in a moment, and slaine by an unknowne hand;
for it seemes that the Duke himselfe onely knew who it was that
had murdered him, and by meanes of the confused presse at the
instant about his person, wee neither did, nor could. The
Souldiers feare his losse will be their utter ruine, wherefore
att that instant the house and the court about it were full,
every man present with the Dukes body, endeavouring a care of
itt. In the meane time Felton pass'd the throng, which was
confusedly great, not soe much as mark'd or followed, in soe
much that not knowing where, nor who he was that had done that
fact, some came to keepe guard at the gates, and others went to
the ramports of the Towne; in all which time the villaine was
standing in the kitchin of the same house, and after the inquiry
made by a multitude of captaines and gentlemen then pressing
into the house and court, and crying out a maine "where is the
villain? where is the butcher?" hee most audaciously and
resolutely drawing
<P 258>
forth his sword, came out and went amongst them, saying boldly,
"I am the Man, heere I am;" upon which diverse drew upon him,
with an intent to have then dispatcht him; but S=r= Thomas
Morton, my selfe, and some others, us'd such means (though with
much trouble and difficulty) that wee drew him out of their
hands, and by order of my Lord High Chamberlaine, wee had the
charge of keeping him from any comming to him untill a guard of
musketeers were brought, to convey him to the Governor's House,
where wee were discharg'd.
   My Lord High Chamberlaine and M=r= Secretary Cooke were then
at the Governor's house, did there take his examination of which
as yet there is nothing knowne, onely whilst he was in our
custody I asked him several Questions, to which he answer'd;
viz=t=. He sayd, he was a Protestant in Religion; hee also
expressed himselfe that he was partly discontented for want of
eighty pounds pay which was due unto him; and for that hee being
Lieutenant of a company of foot, the company was given over his
head unto another, and yet, hee sayd, that that did not move him
to this resolution, but that he reading the Remonstrance of the
house of Parliament it came into his mind, that in committing
the Act of killing the Duke, hee should doe his Country great
good service. And he sayd that to morrow he was to be pray'd for
in London. I then asked him, att what Church, and to
<P 259>
what purpose; hee told me at a Church by Fleet-Street-Conduit,
and, as for a man much discontented in mind. Now wee seeing
things to fall from him in this manner, suffer'd him not to bee
further question'd by any, thinking it much fitter for the Lords
to examine him, and to finde it out, and know from him whether
he was encouraged and sett on by any to performe this wicked
deed.
   But to returne to the screeches made att the fatall blow
given, the Duchesse of Buckingham and the Countesse of Anglesey
came forth into a Gallery which look'd into the Hall where they
might behold the blood of their deerest Lord gushing from him;
ah poore Ladies, such was their screechings, teares, and
distractions, that I never in my Life heard the like before, and
hope never to heare the like againe. His Ma=ties= griefe for the
losse of him, was express'd to be more then great, by the many
teares hee hath shed for him, with which I will conclude this
sad and untimely Newes.
   Felton had sowed a writing in the crowne of his hatt, half
within the lyning, to shew the cause why hee putt this cruell
act in execution; thinking hee should have beene slaine in the
place: and it was thus: "If I bee slaine, let no man condemne
me, but rather condemne himselfe; it is for our sinns that our
harts are hardned, and become sencelesse, or else hee had not
gone soe long unpunished.
   John Felton."
<P 260>
   "Hee is unworthy of the name of a Gentleman, or Soldier, in
my opinion, that is afrayd to sacrifice his life for the honor
of God, his King, and Country.
   John Felton."
   Maddam, this is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, yet all too much too, if it had soe pleased God. I
thought it my bounden duty howsoever to let your Ma=tie=. have
the first intelligence of it, by the hand of 
   Maddam
   Yo=r= sorrowfull servant
   Dudley Carleton.

<Q OR3 1638 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 287>
[} [\LETTER CCCLIII. PRINCE CHARLES TO THE EARL OF NEWCASTLE.\]
}] 
   My Lord
   I would not have you take too much Phisick: for it doth
allwaies make me worse, and I think it will do the like with
you. I ride every day, and am ready to follow any other
directions from you. Make hast to returne to him that loves you.
   Charles P.
   To my Lord of New-castle.

<Q OR3 1638 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 287>
[} [\LETTER CCCLIV. PRINCE CHARLES TO LORD NEWCASTLE.\] }] 
   My Lord
   I thank you for your New Years guift; I am very well pleasd
with it, especially with the brass Statues. On Munday by three
of the clock I shall be glad to meete you at Lambeth.
   Charles.
   For My Lord of New Castle.

<Q OR3 1642 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 291>
[} [\LETTER CCCLV. THE KING TO THE EARL OF NEWCASTLE.\] }] 
   New Castel
   This is to tell you that this Rebellion is growen to that
height, that I must not looke what opinion men ar who at this
tyme ar willing and able to serve me. Therfore I doe not only
permitt, but command you, to make use of all my loving subjects
services, without examining ther Contienses (more then there
loyalty to me) as you shall fynde most to conduce to the
uphoulding of my just Regall Power. So I rest
   Your most asseured faithfull frend
   Charles R.
Shrewsbury 23 Sep. 1642.

<Q OR3 1642 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 292>
[} [\LETTER CCCLVI. KING CHARLES THE FIRST TO THE EARL OF
NEWCASTLE.\] }] 
   New Castell
   Your endeavors are so really faithfull and lucky in my
service, that (though I pretend not to thank you in words, yet)
I cannot but tell you of, (though I can not all) the sence I
have of them, when, as now, I have tyme and oportunitie for it.
This bearer will tell you of the defeate the Rebells have
gotten, which referring to him, I will tell you of fower
thousand pounds I have sent you, for which doe not too much
thanke me, for, it may be, you should not have had it if I had
knowen how it might have been speedily and safely conveyed
hither; yet I thinke very well employed. That I have desyred of
you is to make what hast you can to cum to joine your forses
with myne, for I suppose and hope that my Wife will be cum to
you before you can be reddy to march. I wryt this that ye may be
reddy when she comes, or if (as it is possible) she should take
another course, you might make hast without her; the certainty
of which (I mean my Wife's journie) you will know within
<P 293>
few dayes or howers after the returne of this bearer. This is
all for this tyme. So I rest
   Your most assured constant frend
   Charles R.
Oxford 2: No: 1642

<Q OR3 1642 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 293>
[} [\LETTER CCCLVII. THE KING TO THE EARL OF NEWCASTLE.\] }] 
   New Castell
   The services I have receaved from you hath beene so eminent,
and is lykely to have so great an influence upon all my
Affaires, that I need not tell you that I shall never forgett
it, but alwais looke upon you as a principall instrument in
keeping the Crowne upon my heade. The business of Yorkshire I
account almost done, only I put you in mynde to make your self
maister (according as formerly but breefly I have written to
you) of all the Armes there, to aske them from the Trained bands
by severall divisions, to desyre them from the rest of my well
affected subjects, and to take them from the ill affected,
espetially Leedes and Halifax. I have no greater want then of
Armes, nor meanes to supply myselfe then from you, and therfor I
recomend to you the getting as manie as you
<P 294>
can from all the parts you may, and even from New Castell
(whether for futur supplyes I have ordered great store to bee
sent) into some safe Magazin there. My next greatest want is
dragooners, which I want the more, because it is the Rebelles
(indeed only) strenth, theire foot having no inclination to
winter marches; wherfore if you could there horse and arme 500,
and send these presently to mee, they might be of very great
advantage. You have lykewais neighbours in Darbishire, Cheshire,
and Lancashire, who (for theire good service) stand now in great
need of your assistance, which I shall desire you to give, as
far as will sut with my other service; and that you may doe it
the more effectually, I have given order that a Commission bee
drawen for you to command all the Countries beyond Trent. Lastly
I will put you in mynde that some of your forces extended to
Nottingham and Newarke would make Lincolneshire extreamly right,
and restore those good subjects of myne who ar now banished. So,
desyring to heare often from you I rest
   Your most asseured constant frend
   Charles R.
Oxford 15: De: 1642.

<Q OR3 1642 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 295>
[} [\LETTER CCCLVIII. THE KING TO THE EARL OF NEWCASTLE.\] }] 
   New Castell
   I thanke you for your Letter of the 25: De: and in particular
for sending for my Wyfe with that earnestness that ye have done.
I give you free leave to disobey my warants for issewing Armes;
for what I have done in that, was in supposition that you had
anew for your selfe and your frends; but having not, I confess
Charity begins at home. I wonder to heare you say that there ar
few Armes in that Country, for when I was there, to my knowledge
there was twelve thousand of the Trained Bands (except some few
Hotham gott into Hull) compleat, besydes those of particular
men; therfor on God's name inquyre what is becume of them, and
make use of them all; for those who ar well affected will
willingly give, or lend them, to you; and those who ar not, make
no bones to take them from them. As for your Invitations to
severall places; doe therein as you shall fynd best for my
service, without looking to the little commodities of particular
persons or Sheeres; for though I may propose manie things to
your consideration, yet I shall not impose anie thing upon you;
as for example, I heare Gen. King is come; now I desyre You to
make use of him in your Army, I am sure you have not good
<P 296>
Commanders to spare, no more than Armes, yet, I confess there
may be such reasons that may make this desyre of myne
impossible. I know Newport hes that place he expected; to which
I will only say that I wishe you an abler and - in his roome.
You have had a litle tryall alreddy; yet (according to my owen
rule) I doe not command, but earnestlie desyre you to see if you
can comply with this my desyre. My conclusion is to asseure you
that I doe not only trust in your fidelity, which (as Charles
Chester said of Q. Elizabeth's falts) all the World takes on,
but lykewais to your judgement in my Affairs; and ye may be
confident that nothing shall alter me from being
   Your most asseured constant frend
   Charles R.
Oxford 29: De: 1642.
I promis you, to be as wary of a Treatie, as you can desyre. I
pray you lett me heere from you as oft as ye may.

<Q OR3 1643 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 296>
[} [\LETTER CCCLIX. THE KING TO PRINCE MAURICE.\] }] 
<P 297>
   Nepueu Maurice
   Though Mars be now most in voag, yet Hymen may bee some tymes
remembred. The matter is this, your Mother and I have beene
somewhat engaged concerning a Mariage betwine your brother
Rupert and Mademoisell de Rohan, and now her frends press your
brother to a positive answer which I fynde him resolved to give
negatively; therfore I have thought fitt to know if you will not
by your engagement take your brother hansomly off. I have not
tyme to argue the matter, but, to show my judgement, I asseure
you that if my sone James wer of a fitt age, I would want of my
will but he should have her; and indeed the totall rejecting of
this Allyance may doe us some prejudice, whether ye looke to
thease or the German affaires; the performance of which is not
expected untill the tymes shall be reasonably setled: though I
desyre you to give me an answer assoone as you can (having now
occasion to send to France), because delayes ar, some tymes, as
ill taken as denyalls. So hoping and praying God for good newes
from you, I rest
   Your loving Oncle and faithful frend
   Charles R.
Oxford 4: July 1643.
For my Nepueu Prince Maurice.

<Q OR3 1644 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 298>
[} [\LETTER CCCLX. THE KING TO THE EARL OF NEWCASTLE.\] }] 
   New Castell
   By your last dispach I perceave that the Scots are not the
only, or (it may be said) the least ennemies you contest withall
at this tyme; wherefore I must tell you in a word (for I have
not tyme to make longe discourses) you must as much contem the
impertinent or malitius tonges and pennes of those that ar or
professe to be your frends, as well as you dispyse the sword of
an equall ennemie. The trewth is, if eather you, or my L. Ethen
leave my service, I am sure (at least) all the Northe (I speake
not all I thinke) is lost. Remember all courage is not in
fyghting; constancy in a good cause being the cheefe, and the
dispysing of slanderus tonges and pennes being not the least
ingredient. I'l say no more, but, let nothing disharten you from
doing that which is most for your owen honnor, and good of (the
thought of leaving your charge being against booke)
   Your most asseured reall constant frend
   Charles R.
Oxford 5. Ap: 1644

<Q OR3 1644 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 299>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXI. THE KING TO THE EARL OF NEWCASTLE.\] }] 
   New Castell
   You need not doute of the care I have of the North and in
particular of your assistance against the Scots invasion, but
you must consider that wee, lyke you, cannot doe alwais what we
would; besydes our taske is not litle that we strugle with, in
which if we faile, all you can doe will be to little purpose;
wherfor You may be asseured of all assistance from hence that
may be, without laing our selfes open to eminent danger, the
particulars of which I refer you to my L. Digby and rest
   Your most asseured reall constant frend
   Charles R.
Oxford 11. Ap: 1644.

<Q OR3 1644 OCROMWELL>
<A OLIVER CROMWELL>
<G M>
<P 299>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXII. OLIVER CROMWELL TO COLONEL VALENTINE WALTON
HIS BROTHER IN LAW.\] }] 
<P 300>
   Deere Sir
   It's our duty to sympathize in all mercyes; that wee praise
the Lord together, in chastisements or tryalls, that soe wee may
sorrowe together. Truly England, and the Church of God, hath had
a great favor from the Lord in this great victorie given unto
us, such as the like never was since this War begunn. It had all
the evidences of an absolute Victorie obtained by the Lord's
blessinge upon the godly partye principally. Wee never charged
but wee routed the enimie. The lefte Winge which I commanded,
being our owne horse, saving a few Scottes in our reere, beat
all the Prince's horse. God made them as stubble to our swords.
Wee charged their Regiments of foote with our horse [{and{]
routed all wee charged. The particulars
<P 301>
I cannot relate now; but I believe of twenty thousand, the
Prince hath not four thousand left. Give glory, all the glory,
to God.
   Sir, God hath taken away your eldest sonn by a cannon shott.
Itt brake his legge. Wee were necessitated to have itt cutt off,
wherof hee died.
   Sir you know my tryalls this way, but the Lord supported mee
with this, that the Lord tooke him into the happinesse wee all
pant after and live for. There is your precious child, full of
glory, to know sinn nor sorrow any more. Hee was a gallant
younge man, exceedinge gracious. God give you his comfort.
Before his death hee was soe full of comfort, that to Franke
Russell and my selfe hee could not expresse it, itt was soe
great above his paine. This he sayd to us. Indeed itt was
admirable. A little after hee sayd, one thinge lay upon his
spirit; I asked him what that was; hee told mee that it was that
God had not suffered him to be noe more the executioner of his
enemies. Att his fall, his horse beinge killed with the bullett
and as I am informed three horses more, I am told hee bid them
open to the right and left, that hee might see the rogues runn.
Truly hee was exceedingly beloved in the Armie of all that knew
him. But few knew him; for hee was a precious younge man, fitt
for God. You have cause to blesse the Lord. Hee is a glorious
Sainct in heaven, wherein you ought exceedingly to rejoyce. Lett
this drinke up your sorrowe. Seinge theise are not fayned words
to comfort you; but the
<P 302>
thing is soe real and undoubted a truth, You may doe all thinges
by the strength of Christ. Seeke that, and you shall easily
beare your tryall. Lett this publike mercy to the Church of God
make you to forgett your private sorrowe. The Lord be your
strength; soe prayes
   Your truly faythfull and lovinge brother
   Oliver Cromwell.
July 5=th=. 1644.
   My love to your daughter and my cozen Perceval, sister
Desbrowe, and all freinds with you.

<Q OR3 1645 OCROMWELL>
<A OLIVER CROMWELL>
<G M>
<P 305>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXV. OLIVER CROMWELL TO WILLIAM LENTHALL ESQ=R=.
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS.\] }] 
   Sir
   Beinge commanded by you to this service, I thinke my selfe
bound to acquaint you with the good hand of God towards you and
us. Wee marched yesterday after the Kinge whoe went before us
from Daventree
<P 306>
to Haverbrowe, and quartered about six miles from him. This day
wee marched towards him. Hee drew out to meete us. Both Armies
engaged. Wee, after three howers fight, very doubtfull, att last
routed his Armie, killed and tooke about five thousand, very
many officers, but of what quallitye wee yet know not. Wee tooke
alsoe about two hundred carrages, all hee had, and all his
gunnes, being twelve in number, whereof two were demie-cannon,
two demie culveringes, and (I thinke) the rest sacers. Wee
persued the enimie from three miles short of Haverb. to nine
beyond, even to sight of Leic=r=. whether the Kinge fled. Sir
this is non other but the hand of God, and to him alone belongs
the glorie, wher in none are to share with him. The Generall has
served you with all faythfullness and honor, and the best
commendations I can give him is that I dare say hee attributes
all to God, and would rather perish than assume to himselfe;
which is an honest and a thrivinge way, and yett as much for
bravery may bee given to him in this action as to a man. Honest
men served you faythfully in this action. Sir they are trusty. I
beseech you in the name of God not to discourage them. I wish
this action may begett thankfulnesse and humilitye in all that
are concerned in itt. Hee that venters his life for the libertye
of his countrie, I wish hee trust God for the libertye of his
conscience
<P 307>
and you for the libertye hee fights for. In this hee rests, whoe
is
   your most humble servant
   Oliver Cromwell.
   June 14=th=. 1645 Haverbrowe.
For the Hon=ble= William Lenthall Speaker of Commons-House of
Parliament, Theise.

<Q OR3 1645 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 310>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXVIII. KING CHARLES TO THE EARL OF GLAMORGAN.\]
}] 
   Hereford 23 June 1645.
   Glamorgan
   I am glad to hear that you are gone to Irland, and asseure
you that as my selfe is nowais disheartned by
<P 311>
our late misfortune, so nether this Country; for I could not
have expected more from them then they have now freely
undertaken, though I had come hither absolute victorius; which
makes me hope well of the neighbouring Sheeres; so that (by the
grace of God) I hope shortly to recover my late losse, with
advantage, if such succours come to me from that Kingdome which
I have reason to expect: but the circumstance of tyme is that of
the greatest consequence, being that which now is cheefliest and
earnestliest recommended to you by
   Your most asseured, reall, constant frend
   Charles R.

<Q OR3 1645 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 317>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXX. KING CHARLES TO PRINCE MAURICE.\] }] 
   Newtoune 20 Sep. 1645.
   Nepueu
   What through want of tyme, or unwillingness, to speake to you
of so unpleasing a subject, I have not yet (which now I must
supply) spoken to you freely of your brother Ruperts present
condition. The treuth is, that his unhansom quitting the Castell
and Forte of Bristol, hath inforced me to put him off those
Commands which he had in my Armys, and have sent him a Passe to
goe beyond Sease; now though I could doe no lesse than this, for
which (belive me) I have too much reason upon strickt
examination, yet I asseure you, that I am most confident that
this great error of his (which, indeed, hath given me more
greefe then any misfortune since this damnable Rebellion) hath
no waise proceeded from his change of affection to me or my
Cause; but meerly by having his judgement seduced by some
rottenharted villaines making faire pretentions to him; and I am
resolved so litle to forgett his former services, that,
whensoever it shall please God to enable me to looke upon my
frends lyke a King, he shall thanke God for the paines he hath
spent in my Armys. So
<P 318>
much for him; now for yourselfe. I know you to be so free from
his present misfortune, that it nowais staggars me in that good
opinion which I have ever had of you, and, so long as you shall
not be weary of your Imploiments under me, I will give You all
the incouragement and contentment that lyes in my power;
however, you shall alwais fynd me
   Your loving oncle, and most asseured frend,
   Charles R.

<Q OR3 1647 OCROMWELL>
<A OLIVER CROMWELL>
<G M>
<P 318>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXXI. OLIVER CROMWELL TO SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX.\] }]
<P 319>
   Sir
   It hath pleased God to raise mee out of a dangerous
sicknesse; and I doe most willingly acknowledge that the Lord
hath (in this visitation) exercised the bowells of a Father
towards mee. I receaved in my selfe the sentence of death, that
I might learne to trust in him that raiseth from the dead, and
have noe confidence in the flesh. Its a blessed thinge to dye
daylie; for what is there in this world to be accounted off the
best men according to the flesh; and thinges are lighter than
vanitye. I finde this only good; to love the Lord, and his poore
despised people; to doe for them, and to bee readie to suffer
with them; and hee that is found worthy of this hath obteyned
great favour from the Lord: and hee that is established in this,
shall (being conformed to Christ, and the rest of
<P 320>
the bodye) participate in the Glory of a resurrection which will
answare all.
   Sir, I must thankfully confesse your favor in your last
Letter. I see I am not forgotten: and truly, to bee kept in your
remembrance is very great satisfaction to mee; for I can say in
the simplicitye of my hart, I putt a high and true valew upon
your love; which when I forgett, I shall cease to bee a
gratefull and an honest man. I most humblie begg my service may
be presented to your Lady, to whom I wish all happinesse and
establishment in the Truth. Sir, my prayers are for you, as
becomes
   Your Excellencies most humble servant
   Oliver Cromwell.
   Sir, M=r= Rushworth will write to you about the quartering
and the Letter lately sent you, and therefore I forbeare.
   March 7=th=. 1647.
   For his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax Gen=l=. of the
Parliaments Armies, theise.

<Q OR3 1648 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 320>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXXII. KING CHARLES THE FIRST TO PRINCE CHARLES\]
}] 
   Teusday 1 Aug: 1648
   Charles
   I had written to you sooner had I knowen
<P 321>
where you had been; and particularly that express which, upon
Saterday last, I directed to your brother I had sent to you, but
I thought that [^CYPHER OMITTED^] I command you to doe nothing,
whether it concerns War or Peace, but with the advice of your
Councell; and that you be constant to those grounds of Religion
and Honor which heertofore I have given you. I suppose your not
knowing how to send your Letters to me hath been the cause of
your not writing since your comming out of Paris; but now,
indeed I shall take it unkindly if you doe not answer this, and
write my dyverse other Letters. God direct and prosper you in
all your actions.
   Your loving Father
   Charles R.
This Cypher which now I write in, is that which was sent you by
the noble frend who conveis this Letter to you from me.

<Q OR3 1648 CHARLES1>
<A CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 322>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXXIII. THE KING TO PRINCE CHARLES: PART IN
CYPHER.\] }] 
   Let none decypher this but your selfe, or my Lord Culpeper.
   Newport 7 No: 1648.
   Charles
   I have had so hopefull a reporte of your sickeness by D=r=.
Fraiser, that I hope you will be fitt to read a Letter before
that this can come to you; and though now I will not troble you
with long discourses, yet, I must desyre of you an account of
the receipt of my former Letters, to witt fyve in October,
besydes one yesterday; in some of which I gave you an advice
[^CYPHER OMITTED^] For other things I refer you to my former
Letters, and to the obedience of your Mother's commands. So God
bless you, and send you perfect healthe and prosperity.
   Your loving father
   Charles R.

<Q OR3 1665 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 327>
[} [\LETTER CCCLXXV. KING CHARLES THE SECOND TO THE EARL OF
SANDWICH.\] }] 
<P 328>
   Whitehall 9=th= June 1665.
   My Lord Sandwich, Though you have already done me very
eminent service, yet the great part you have had in this happy
Victory which it hath pleased God to send us, adds very much to
the former obligations I have to you. I send this bearer my Lord
Hawly on purpose to lett you know more particularly my sence of
it, and will say no more my selfe till I see you, that I may
take you in my armes, and give you other testimonies how truely
I am
   Your affectionat frinde
   Charles R.
For the Earle of Sandwich.



<B HENSLOWE>

[^SAMPLE 1 = FORGERIES AND ONE-EYED BULLS: EDITORIAL QUESTIONS
IN CORPUS WORK. ED. BY KERЋNEN, JUKKA. NEUPHILOLOGISCHE
MITTEILUNGEN 2. HELSINKI. 1998.^]

<S SAMPLE 1>
<Q HEN 1600S WFAWNTE>
<A WILLIAM FAWNTE>
<G M>
<P F83>
[} [\F.83. WILLIAM FAWNTE TO EDWARD ALLEYN\] }]
M=r=. Allin mey Loue remembered I vnderstoode bey a man which
came with too Beares from the gardeyne that you haue a deseyre
to bey~ one of mey Boles. I haue three westerne boles at this
teyme but I haue had verey ell loeck with them for one of them
hath lost his horne to the queyck that I think that hee will
neuer bee to feyght a gayne that is mey ould star of the west
hee was a verey esey bol and mey Bol, Bevis hee hath lost one of
his eyes but I think if you had him hee would do you more hurt
then good for I protest I think hee would ether throo vp your
dodges in to the loftes oreles dingout theare braynes a gen~st
the grates so that I think hee is not for your turne Beseydes I
esteme him verey hey for my Lord of Rutlandes man badmee for him
xx marckes I haue a bol which came out of the west which standes
mee in twentey nobles If you so did leyck him you shall haue him
of mey faith hee es a marvilous good Boole and coning and well
shapte and but fore eyre ould feiue [\OR feine\] com teime and
shuch a on as I think you haue had but fev shuch for I a seure
you that I hould him as good a doble bole as that which you
hadoumes last a singgle. and one that I haue played thertey or
fortey courses be fore he hath bene tacken from the stacke with
the best dodges which halfe a dosen kneyghtes had If you send a
man vnto mee he shall see aney of mey boles playe and you shall
haue aney of them [\LACUNA IN MS.\]resoe if the will plesoure
you. Thus biding you harteley fare well I end
   Your louing frend
   William ffawnte
[\ADDRESSED\] To mey Verey Louing frend M=r=. Allin at the
Palles Garden at London giue these

<Q HEN 1600S WFAWNTE>
<A WILLIAM FAWNTE>
<G M>
<P F84>
[} [\F.84. WILLIAM FAWNTE TO EDWARD ALLEYN\] }]
M=r= Allin I haue sent these few leynes vnto you to in treat you
to send me a cople of hee beare cobes and I will think my selfe
mutch behoulden vnto you I praye you let me haue them blackones
and shuch as you think will [\WORD CROSSED OVER\] macke greate
beares and for the mony I will send it vp by this carior at his
next coming vp I praye you withbrowne to see them set forward
Thus hoping will satisfey my deseire of and wishing you=r=
helth.
   You=r= Louinge frend to ves
   William Fawnthe
[\ADDRESSED\] To my Very Louing frend m=r= Allin at the Pallis
gardin giue thes

<Q HEN 1600S WFAWNTE>
<A WILLIAM FAWNTE>
<G M>
<P F85>
[} [\F.85. WILLIAM FAWNTE TO EDWARD ALLEYN\] }]
M=r= Allin I forgot to talck with you when I was in london off
the beare which you sayd & you had got I did loock off it but it
was a shee cob so my desire is that you would send me by the
carier a hee cob and shuch a one as you think will [\WORD
CROSSED OVER\] mack a great beare and I will send you your mony
for him by the next carier. and I will be redeye to do and so I
[\WORDS tacke my CROSSED OVER\] bid [\?\] you farewell from my
hous~ at foston this ix of [\WORD CROSSED OVER\] November.
   Your Louing frend to ves
   William Fawnte
[\ADDRESSED\] To my vere Louing frend M=r= Allin at the Palis
gardin giue thes~

<B ROYAL2>

[^SAMPLE 1 = LETTERS TO KING JAMES THE SIXTH FROM THE QUEEN,
PRINCE HENRY, PRINCE CHARLES, THE PRINCESS ELIZABETH AND HER
HUSBAND FREDERICK KING OF BOHEMIA, AND FROM THEIR SON PRINCE
FREDERICK HENRY. ED. BY WALKER, SIR PATRICK AND ALEXANDER
MACDONALD. EDINBURGH: THE MAITLAND CLUB. 1835.^]

<S SAMPLE 1>
<Q RO2 1612? BELIZABETH>
<A ELIZABETH OF BOHEMIA>
<G F>
[} [^TO KING JAMES I, NO DATE, ABOUT 1612^] }] 
Most gratious soueraygn and dear father, this gentleman M=r.=
Haringtons returne to the court gaue mee a well pleasing
oportunity to present y=or= Ma=ty= w=t= this paper the messenger
of my most humble duty to your highnes thinking it I confesse
infinnitelye long since I was so happie as to enioy your
presence w=ch= though I dare not presume to desire I know
nothing I woulld so gladly obtayne And so humbly craving y=or=
Ma=ties= blessing I will euer continue
   Your Ma=ties= most obedient daughter
   Elizabeth
To the kynges most excellent Maiesty

<Q RO2 1614? BELIZABETH>
<A ELIZABETH OF BOHEMIA>
<G F>
[} [^TO KING JAMES I, OCTOBER 20TH 1614?^] }] 
Sr, Being desirous by all the meanes I can to keepe my self
still in your M. remembrance, I would not lett pass so good an
occation as this bearer returning for England to present my most
humble dutie and seruice to your M. by these beseeching your M.
to continue me still in your gratious fauour it being the
greatest comfort I haue to think that your M. doth vouchsaf to
loue and fauour me, which I shall ever strive to deserue, in
obeying with all humbleness whatsoever your M. is pleased to
command her, who shall euer pray to God with all her harte for
your M happiness and that she may be euer worthy the title
   Sr of your M,
   Most humble & obedient daughter and seruant
   Elizabeth
Heidleberg this 20 October
   (\Au Roy\)



<B CORNWALL>

[^THE PRIVATE CORRESPONDENCE OF JANE LADY CORNWALLIS; 1613-1644.
ED. BY GRIFFIN, RICHARD, LORD BRAYBROOKE. LONDON: S. & J.
BENTLEY, WILSON, & FLEY. 1842.^]

<Q COR 1613 JCORNWALLIS>
<A JANE CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 1>
[} [\I. JANE LADY CORNWALLEYS TO MR. PARR.\] }] 
   M=r= Parr, - I hope you do so well remember what I said to
you, at your being here, as that you have not given no
incoregement to the gentleman to prosede in that matter, for,
as, I tould you then, I saye now, that sinc Sir Willem
Cornwaleys's death I neaver as yet had a thought of changing the
course of life which I now lede. What may be my fortune herafter
I know not, for it is onli known to Him which is the disposer of
all things; whom I beseche so to direct me in all my courses as
may be most to his glori: but this gentleman being so desierous
to see me, as you said he was, I thought then, and so I do now,
it ware uncivell
<P 2>
part of me to forbid him coming, but lef it, you know, to
himselfe, and so I do still.
   Yo=r= asseured frend, Ja. Cornwaleys.
[\1613.\]
   To my kind frend, M=r= Parr, at Palgrave.

<Q COR 1613 JCORNWALLIS>
<A JANE CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 2>
[} [\II. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^JANE CORNWALLIS TO
ELNATHAN PARR^]
   M=r= Parr, - I am sorry that my last gaive you soch destast
as by your last I parceave it did; it was no part of my meaning
that it should do so: and wareas you saye that Sir Nicholas and
my La. expects their son should have soch grate prefarment by
me, I must answer againe, that they have made it seeme other
wayes to me, in asseuring me that it was myselfe, and not my
fortune, which they desiered; but, I confess, by several
circumstances I maye justly feare that I shall find my fortune
to be the chiefe motive which hath persuaded them to this;
besides which, if I do, yet it will much discourage me for
persevering any furder in it.
   Thus, being in hast, I rest y=r= asseured frend as long as
you are as I take you to be,
   Ja. Cornwaleys.
   Pray let my love be remembered to M=rs= Parr.
[\1613.\]
To my varie kind frend, M=r= Parr.

<Q COR 1613 JCORNWALLIS>
<A JANE CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 3>
[} [\III. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^JANE CORNWALLIS TO MR.
PARR^]
   M=r= Parr, - I thanck you for part of your letter, as farre
as you ware indifferent in this busines; but I must tell you
that I did never expect that you would have ben a persuader of
me to a gave awaye the increase of my owne estate, being you
have eaver heard me earnestli to protest that I would not,
though I had married to a much grater fortune then Sir Nicholas
Bacon doth offer with his son; for I would never have done my
child so much wronge, though I might have had all the good of
the world by it. This is no new thinge to you, for you know that
before I eaver saw M=r= Bacon that this was my mind, and from
which I neaver will be removed. Besides, whatsoeaver you and the
rest of M=r= Bacon's frends think of my fortune in present, I
know any indifferent bodi will saye it doth desarve farre grater
offers then hath yet ben made me; and in it I shall not nede to
include that money which Sir Charles is to paye, neaver in
these. Besides, you know how often you have brought me word from
M=r= Bacon that I should do with my own estate, besides my
child's, what I would; which, if it should now apear to me that
all this was but done to entice my affection, would be a grate
<P 4>
reson to direct it another waye, and I fere I shall find such
hard mesure; but, howsoever, (yet) yf you carry yourself justly,
you shall eaver find me your frend to my power, Ja. Cornewaleys.
[\1613\] .
To my loveing frend, M=r= Parr, at Palgrave in Suffolk, this
give.

<Q COR 1613 EPARR>
<A ELNATHAN PARR>
<G M>
<P 4>
[} [\IV. MR. PARR TO ANNE LADY BACON.\] }] 
   Madam, - I receaved a letter from your La. by the hands of
M=r= Bacon about the 15th of October last, since which tyme it
hath pleased God to make me unserviceable both for the public
duties of my calling, and also for private offices towards my
friends, even to the time of writing this letter, being the
Lord's close prisoner in my chamber, not being able to indure so
much light as might serve to read one line for my comfort. I
beseech his Heavenly Majestie to sanctify his fatherly
punishment to his own glorie and the good of my soul. I am so
much the more bold to answer your letter, in as much as it has
pleased you first to use me, and my La. Cornwalleys after to
suffer me, as an instrument in this weighty buisnes, to the
which I wish so well that I would contentedly go a hundred miles
on my bare foot for the good accomplyshing of the same. For your
letter, Madam, first, I thanke your La. for it; and then,
<P 5>
I desier you to know, that you writt nothing that might grieve
me as concerning myself, but my grief was for the ill speeding
of the buisnes, which your letter did portend. For my La.
Cornwalleys her favour towards me, though I had great cause to
fear the loss of it, yett I certify your La. that I have it as
amply as ever I had, I humbly thank God for it. And whereas your
La. writes of amends and satisfaction to be made to me for my
trouble undertaken, I answer that, first, I give your La. many
thanks, and then I protest before God, who knoweth harts, that I
never aymed at any such thing, neyther have been carried to this
so much as in hope of any preferment. But if you will needes
know what were my ends, they were these: first, the approbation
of my service to Sir N. Bacon and your La.; secondly, and more
chiefly the glory of God and his Gospel to be more advanced by
this mach, besides the general good of the country by so worthy
a gentleman, together with the persuaded content of all parties
to insue upon the same. And therfore, that you may be well
persuaded of my integrity herein, I do hereby freely and
willingly discharge your La. of all care and thought of any
satisfaction to be made for my paynes herein, though I despise
not your love; desiering that whatsoever you have intended this
way towards me, may, with much more, be added to the enlargement
of conditions
<P 6>
in this busines. The rest of your La=ps= letter, is, that you
offer what you are able, and that you are not capable how my La.
Cornwalleys could be offended att any thing and that you referr
it to the providence of God. For these things I humbly beseech
you, good Madam, give me leave to speak boldly to your Christian
hart, being as ready to use the like boldness to my La.
Cornwalleys if ther lay such impediment on that. For your
ability, Madam, though you know best your own estate, yett the
whole contry, you even show with fayre reason to be partial on
your side, judge that you are able conveniently to give full
satisfaction. For my La. Cornwalleys her offence at the
conditions; first, they are farr under the proportion of their
valew, beside short in some thing of what formerly had been
spoken of. Secondly, they were bredd from an erroneous
supposition of her estate; and therefore she concludes thus: If
error, being less, bring forth such conditions, etc. then truth,
being more, requires an enlargement. And truly, Madam, might it
please you to give me leave to be so bold, if you were as wise
as Solomon, what could you alledge why you should not amplify
the conditions, considering the worthiness both of the person
and estate? Not want of ability, for the contrary is more than
evident; not the envy of others, for, first, you may do it with
a good conscience, and
<P 7>
that which you give M=r= Bacon already, breedes as much envy as
if you should give him as much more. Not the provision of other
kindred; for, first, that is nearest; secondly, more necessary;
thirdly, they may also be relieved, though not so largely. Now,
whether this be first to be regarded or such kindred, this I
say, by which so great good may redound to yourselves, the
family, and the whole contry, he who is impartial will easily
determine on this side. But you will say, how can the La.
Cornwalleys proportion on her part, conditions expected in case
of death? To this I answer, that either she must perform what is
fit and reasonable, or if upon capitulation you shall not be
able, then you must be contented with such as are offered. I
know, as you shall find her wise and courteous, so conscionable
and plaine in every thing. If you shall say, the worth of M=r=
Bacon is great, I confes it, and greater than I will write, to
avoyde suspicion of flattery; but sure then you will compare
herselfe? And thus much I oft have heard her say, that, had it
not been out of a special regard of his worthines, and out of a
great deale of respect to Sir N. Bacon and yourselfe, she would
never have entertayned it thus far, upon greater conditions then
yett have been spoken of by any. Surely, Madam, there is great
reason, you very well know, that you should strayne yourself for
the effecting of this 
<P 8>
mach; for, as I have often expressed on M=r= Bacon's behalfe to
her, that I think she should be as happy for an husband as a
woman might be, so I expressed on her behalfe to you, that M=r=
Bacon should be as happy for a wyfe as any man in England. Now
for the last point, concerning casting yourself and the buisnes
upon the providence of God; it is well done, but yett, good
Madam, call to mynde that which you know as well as myself, that
meanes likely, fitt, lawful, and profitable are to be used, or
else we do err in the practice of our fayth, or the providence
of God. God hath made a way for you in this buisnes; follow you
the good hand of God, using such aforenamed meanes, and then
commit it to his providence. A word of this is enough to you
that understand and desyer to practise according to sound
knowledge. And now, to cease to be teadious farther to you and
troublesome to myselfe, I eaven humbly beseeche Sir N. Bacon and
your La. with impartial counsellors, to consider of this weighty
affair, and not to lett slip so fayre an occasion of glory to
God, good to the contry, preferment to your sonne, and comfort
to yourselves. I would to God it might enter into your mynde to
make some worthy additions to your former proffers. I beseche
the Lord Jesus of his eternal Spirit to directe you in the
managing of this matter to the accomplishing of it, if it be His
<P 9>
good pleasure. And thus, praying God for the continual encrease
of your temporal and spiritual prosperity, I present the
remembrance of my humble duty to Sir N. Bacon and your Ladyship,
and rest,
   Your Ladyshypps to be commanded in what I may, 
   Elnathan Parr.
[\1613.\] 

<Q COR 1613 A2BACON>
<A ANNE BACON>
<G F>
<P 9>
[} [\V. ANNE LADY BACON TO MR. PARR.\] }] 
   M=r= Parr, - I have received your letter, and I am very sory
that any losse of favour or otherwise any hurt should be to you,
I am sure my letter could import no such thing. I cannot give
you so large an answer to every poynt in your letter as wear
fytt, but you shall hear from me againe very shortly when I have
spoaken to my sonne, when I will truly answer your letter from
poynt to poynt. I praye you co~mend my love to the Lady
Cornwaleys, whose love I desyre to continew, though she will not
yeelde it me in that sort I desyer. And thus, in hast, fare
well. God hath the disposing of all things, and to Him I co~mitt
this and all other. Yo=r= assured
   Anne Bacon.
[\1613.\]
   To my assured freind M=r= Parr.

<Q COR 1613 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 10>
[} [\VI. NATHANIEL BACON TO MR. PARR.\] }] 
   M=r= Parr, - I have sent to you according to my promise,
being desirous to understand the estate of the supposed sicke
person, of whose health my well wishes have not as yet geven me
leave to despair. I praye send me word whether our intelligence
did fayle or not, and how the determination for the jorney
houldeth, or, if the party be evilye affected, whether shee will
be visitable this afternoone or not? Thus, not desiring you
further trouble at this tyme, I commyt you to God. Yo=r= assured
friend, 
   Nath. Bacon.
[\1613.\]
   To his much respected friend M=r= Parr, at Palgrave, gev
this.

<Q COR 1613 A2BACON>
<A ANNE BACON>
<G F>
<P 10>
[} [\VII. ANNE LADY BACON TO MR. PARR.\] }] 
   Sir, - If my busynes had not bene much, and my stay at
Redgrave very littill I hade purposed to have sene you at
Palgrave. But, I humbly thanke God, I did heare there you wear
somthing amended; I praye God to perfect your recovery. I have
received your letters, but I have not leysure neyther to reade
them as I shoulde, nor to wright
<P 11>
an answer as I would, my house being full of strangers; but, if
God will, I will wright shortly. My sonne Nath. as I thinke is
at London, if he be not gonne beyond the seas, which he did
purpose, as I percieved by his letters the last weak. Soon his
distance will be very great, so as we are content to lett hym
travell for his recreation. You shall hear from me shortly: till
then, fare well! By a dim candle, and old eyes going to bedd.
Yo=r= assured freind,
   Anne Bacon.
[\1613.\]
   To my very lovinge freind M=r= Parr, the Minister of God's
word in Palgrave.

<Q COR 1613 A2BACON>
<A ANNE BACON>
<G F>
<P 11>
[} [\VIII. ANNE LADY BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
   The greatest treasur vnder y=e= sunn (which is) the loue of
God, the peace of consince and joy in the Holy Ghost, be w=th=
you to yo=r= eternall comfort.
My good La.
   I do percive that the olde proverbis be not alwaies trewe,
for I do fynde y=t= the absence of my Nath. doth brede in me the
more continuall remembrance of hym: and I cannot thinke of hym
but I must do the lyke of yo=r= La=pp=. who I knowe is lodged in
the principall p=t= of his hart. But how yo=u= stande affected
vnto hym I knowe not, 
<P 12>
otherwise then his resolution to travill makith me to suspect
it. But, howsoever, I do and ever shall loue you vnfainedly and
most deerly in the Lorde, and ame and shal be alwaies redy to do
any kindness or servis that one Christian freind may perform
vnto another. And I wishe from my hart that I wear abill to
obtain yo=u= to my selfe as my owne, if I myght be so happy. But
what I cannot have by alliance, yo=u= shall have by Christian
bande. And I wishe my sonnes estate wear awnswerable to yo=r=
content. In shorte, I hope to enioy yo=u= as I would; for a
trewer husband, and on that louved yo=u= better, shall yo=u=
never have. But I comend hym and yo=u= bothe vnto the disposing
of Almighty God, who sitteth in y=e= heavens and oderth althings
in this wicked world for the good of his children and for the
distruction of his enimies, howsoever for a tyme thay seeme to
flourishe. To this merciful God I comend yo=r= La=pp=. w=th= my
littill swete cosen yo=r= prety sonn; and do rest, Ever yo=rs=,
   Anne Bacon.
Culford, y=e= 22 of Octobr a=o= 1613.
   To my very nobill good freind the Lady Cornwallis, at M=rs=
Cooke hir howse, neer to the Earle of Northampton's Howse by
Charinge Crosse.

<Q COR 1613 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 13>
[} [\IX. NATHANIEL BACON TO MR. PARR.\] }] 
   M=r= Parr, - I am hartely sorry that I have lived so long in
ignorance of yo=r= estate, that I must necessarilie doubt of
your well beinge; but my continuall prayers and well wishes in
ther effects have promised so perfect a recovery, that my doubt
resteth in part diminished. The success of my busines here hath
so assured me of the constancie of fortune in myne endevors,
that I do remaine desperate, wherfore I have undertaken that
course for Antwerp which I intended, wherin I desier, by your
well wishes, the continuance of your affection, of which I am
already truely sensible, that my actions shall not in any thinge
be more happily employed then to endevor a requitall. If you
come to London, I desier to heare from you, which you may easily
do by the means of M=r= Quester, the postmaster of Antwerpe,
dwelling in Fillpot Lane. In the meane tyme, good angels guard
you. Yo=r= assured friend,
   Nath. Bacon.
From London, October [\1613\] .
   To his much respected friend M=r= Parr, Preacher at Palgrave
in Suffolk, deliver this, at Sir Nicolas Bacon's howse, to be
convayed unto him. 

<Q COR 1613 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 14>
[} [\X. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Madam,
   The pretiousness of a faier winde & a good ship, especially
at this tyme of the year, hath constrayned to me (by the
suddayneness of the occasion offered) to transgress all the
bounds of loue & ciuillitye in that I haue not bin able to kyss
yo=e= sweetest hands before my departure; but these
circumstances, I do not doubt shall sufficiently satisfie yo=e=
discretion and howld me excused. Deare Madam, all my happyness
hath bin purchased by yo=e= fayth to what I haue proffessed,
wherefore farther protestations ar altogether unnecessarye;
onely lett constancie still seeme my cheifest vertue, w=ch= I do
persewade my self shalbe easilye able to make good, or better
yo=e= greatest expectations. My retourne shall rest altogether
vppon yo=e= command & the conueniencye of farther proceedinges,
vntill when I leaue you w=th= M=rs= Cooke & yo=e= pretty sonne,
w=th= my best seruisse, and prayers for all blessinges temporal
and spirituall most religiously attended. From Grauesend, ready
to depart for Flushing, this 29 Nouembre. Yours absolutelye,
   Nath. Bacon.
[\1613.\]
   Yo=e= La=pp= may be pleased to lett M=r= Cuckow
<P 15>
enquire at M=r= Quester's howse, the postmaster of Antwerp,
dwellinge in Fillpot Lane, once in eight or ten dayes, wher he
shall vnderstand of my letters.
   To the much honoured Lady the Lady Cornwallis, at M=rs=
Cookes howse by Charinge Cross, geue these. London.

<Q COR 1613 A2BACON>
<A ANNE BACON>
<G F>
<P 15>
[} [\XI. ANNE LADY BACON TO MR. PARR.\] }] 
   M=r= Parr, - I have deffered my writting unto you, desyring
to heare from my sonne, who hath, byne at London ever synce the
La. went up, and is either ther still, or else going over the
sea, which he purposed when I last heard from hym. We have
offered what we are abell, and what we can and will faythfully
performe. If it be accepted, we shall rejoyse much therein; if
not, we must be contented without grudging, asseuring ourselves
it is the Lord's doing. And although the juell layd before us be
never so riche, if we be not abill to buy it we must be content
to forbeare it. We must not laye out all our stocke upon one
purchas, having so many others to provide for. God blesse the
good La. with a richer choyse, that may bringe a happy content
to hyr mind. I do honor and love hyr with my holle hart, and I
know an honester and trew harted husband shall she never have.
But this I leave unto hyr La.
<P 16>
consideracion; resting much indebted unto you for your kinde and
faythfull love, which you shall finde as occasion dothe serve.
   Yo=rs= asseuredly, Anne Bacon.
[\1613.\]
   To my much approved freind M=r= Parre, at Palgrave, give
this.

<Q COR 1613 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 16>
[} [\XII. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Hart,
   I thincke you haue already vnderstood what vse I made of the
litter, & I confess I was not able by any meanes to endure the
tediousness of yt any farther; wherfore I made vse of the coach,
according to yo=e= adwise, & cam well to Chelmsford, wher I mett
w=th= my Lady Withipoole, w=th= whome I was enforced by her
importunity to supp; butt thatt night, after I was in bedd, a
distemper cam uppon me, so as I slept little till the morninge.
I could not impute yt vnto any thing but diet & ale of hers,
w=ch= she com~ended vnto me, & w=ch= I veryly beleiue caused yt,
althoug I would not lett her vnderstand so much. This day I haue
very well passed ouer my journy, & got a better stomach than I
had this month, that I hope now a
<P 17>
bettering in my health euery day; w=ch= I hartely also wish vnto
you, desiring you to be carefull of yt, & to geue yo=e=self the
best content the place affordeth. Uppon Fryday or Satturday I
purpose to depart. Com~end my best loue to yo=e=self, w=th= the
rest of my good friends, & comand him, who is alwaies & oneley
Yo=rs=,
   Nath. Bacon.
[\1613.\]
   My brother Killigrew kyses thye hands, w=th= my sister,
sending you many thanks for yo=e= kind tokens.
   To his most respected friend the Lady Cornewalleys, at her
lodginge in the Strand.

<Q COR 1614 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 17>
[} [\XIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Madam,
   W=th=out circumstances I am her the same man as I parted from
you, beinge not able to make my self more worthy of yo=e= loue
then before. I haue found base enimyes in myne absence beyond
expectation, but my cheifest friends firme onely in what they
haue intended, & encrease of loue, although not of fortunes.
Deare Madam, I am reasonably sensible of yo=e= deseruings & what
<P 18>
concerneth my self; wherfore be perswaded of my best endeuors
fore the satisfaction or furtherance of eyther. I haue freely
imparted (not w=th=out great reasons) the success of my business
to my father & mother, the entertaynement of w=ch= I will refer
to yo=e= owne experience at yo=e= retourne into the contry, wher
I shall be easily able to iustifie whatsoeuer I haue eyther
protested for my self or promised for my friends. Vntill when
all good angells guard you. From Culford, January xuiij. Yours,
   Nath. Bacon.
[\1613-14.\]
   I desier you to kyss the hands of the L. of Bedford of my
part, & lett her vnderstand that at this instant I am prouidinge
to do her seruise.
   To his much honoured Lady, the Lady Cornwalleys, at Twitnam.

<Q COR 1614? A2BACON>
<A ANNE BACON>
<G F>
<P 18>
[} [\XIV. ANNE LADY BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Madam,
   I cannot forbear to signify unto you how welcom my sonne
Nathaniel with your favor is unto me, for without it I thinke I
should not have seen hym a great while. And now, Madam,
<P 19>
as you shall find us in love reddy to perform all things as we
have spoaken unto you, so shall I not cease to praye unto the
Lorde Almighty for the increase of faythfull love between you
with all spiritual graces and happiness in this life, and in the
life to come, endles felicity to you and yours, in the presence
of the Blessed Trinity, whear is fulnes of joy, and at whose
right hand are unspeakable pleasures for evermore. And if it
shall please you to take Culford in your returne from London,
you shall be most entirely welcom and I shall much rejoyce in
it; and Nath. will meete you on the way to direct you thether.
And thus, good Lady, with more trew love in hart then I can
expresse in words, I leave you to the blessed direction of
Almighty God, and do rest Yo=r= ever loving freind,
   Anne Bacon.
[\1613-14.\]
   To my deerly beloved freind the Lady Jane Cornwallis give
this, at London.

<Q COR 1614 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 19>
[} [\XV. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
   The neglect of my weekely promise, sweetest Madam, maketh me
somewhat ashamed of the approbation of myne honesty by yo=e=
letter; but I am suer reason ther was, w=ch= I desier you will
at the least imagine worthy an excuse. The owld 
<P 20>
prouerbe, (^Out of sighte out of mynde,^) I haue proued
directlye contrary, for I haue bin so wholely possesed in this
absence w=th= the trewe consideration of yowr deservinges, that
the desier of yo=e= presence is nowe inexpressible, & I do rest
in a more troubled estate then yo=e= credit to my greatest
protestations can make you sensible of. The tyme maketh me happy
in the expectation of yo=e= sodayne cominge downe, w=ch= I wish
for many respects may be made by this way: lett me vnderstand
perticularly of yt, & I will warrant you safe conduct; vntill
when I leaue you w=th= my best wishes & prayers moste
religiously attended.
   Yowrs entyrely,
   Nath. Bacon.
Culford, this February 6 [\1613-14\] .
   Speak yo=e= mynde to the Lady of Bedford in my behalf, & tell
her that the weather hath bin very vnfauorable to the
proceedinges of her picture. 
   To the much honored Lady, the Lady Cornwalleys, geue these.

<Q COR 1614 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 20>
[} [\XVI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Madam,
   The vnwished for newes in o=e= contrye maketh me desier the
entertaynement of my speciale condolements w=th= you for the
vntymelye death
<P 21>
of the Lord Harrington, & leaueth me so sensible of ou=e= frayle
estate in this lyfe that I cannot but w=th= my gratest oratory
solycite a better assurance for the enioyinge of yo=e= sweetest
companye. Deare Madam, make me happy in my chiefest desiers by
yo=e= speedy retourne, w=ch= is equally enuited by other
conueniences. My father & mother ar determyned to make a longe
journeye to Maubourne hilles presently after the feast of o=e=
Lady, before w=ch= tyme I thincke yo=e= presence is neccessarily
required. Remember y=oe= promise in cominge downe by my fathers,
w=ch= seemeth specially conuenient unto me. The hast of the
messenger biddeth me kyss yo=e= hands, wishinge you all
happyness & restinge entyerly yours, Nath. Bacon.
   Culford, March 6 [\1613-14\] .
   For my Lady of Bedford, let my best seruise attend her, & my
continual prayers for all comfort spiritual & temporal.
   To the most honoured Lady, the Lady Jane Cornewalleys, at
M=rs= Cookes house by Charing Cross, geue these.

<Q COR 1614? A2BACON>
<A ANNE BACON>
<G F>
<P 22>
[} [\XVII. ANNE LADY BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Madam,
   Yo=r= delaye in cominge downe hath caused you once againe to
be trobled with my deer Nath=l= at London. I am sorry that your
busynes doth carye you another way that I shall not see you at
Culford in your jorney towards Broome. But it shall not be longe
I trust in God before I see you in a neerer affinity then yett
ever I did, in which I joye muche now; and I doubt not but you
shall muche more joye in it, when I am with the Lord God in
Heaven. My husband commends hym very kindly unto you, and we
bothe doe very willingly give unto you the juill of our deer
sonne. God blesse you together with abbundance of all felicity
in this lyfe, and in the lyfe to come the presence of the
Blessed Trinity, a greater happiness cannot be to any. Deer La.
the blessed God be with you for ever. Yo=rs=,
   Anne Bacon
[\1613-14.\]
   To my most deerly beloved the Lady Jane Cornwallis give this,
at London.

<Q COR 1614 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 23>
[} [\XVIII. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\]
}] 
Deare Cornewallis,
   The K. of Denmarcke's unexpected coming hath constrayned me
to defer my setting forward towards Rutland from the 8=th= of
August to the tenth, which is Wensday comse'night, and so itt
will be the 11=th= before I shall be at Huntingdon, whear I
promis myselfe the contentment of meeting you; whearof to have a
confirmation, and that you may not be ignorant of this
alteration, I send this bearer, whom lett me intreatt you to
dispatch as soone as you may: and suffer not any thing lesse
then necessity to change your purpos, and M=r= Bacon's, to take
this jorney for her sake that will ever be to you both a most
assured and affectionate freind, L. Bedford.
   My mistres comanded me not to forget her kindest comendations
to you.
Bedford House, in haste, this Saterday morneinge 30th July
[\1614\] .
   To my worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis. 

<Q COR 1614 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 24>
[} [\XIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Cornewallis,
   I know you thinke itt strange that you have not all this
while hearde from me; but, so I know too, when you know the
occasions, you will acquitte me of deserving much blame. When I
went from hence itt was with a full resolution, if God
contradicted not my purpos, to have seen you at Broome before my
retorne heather, and to have intreated you to have made a
journey to Exton to have been my gueste; but, because I could
not sett a sertaine day for my goeing with you, I deferred my
wrighting to you still I cam into the contry, wheare within 8
days the K. overtooke me; against whos coming, and during his
stay att my house, all my tyme and litle witt was so taken up
about the busnes of house; keepinge as itt made me lay all else
aside. Within 3 days after, my promis carried me to my Lo. of
Huntingdon's, wheare I intended to have made but 2 days' stay,
and then to have retorned to Exton; but ther I mett with a
peremtory comandement from the Queene to wayte upon her at
Woodstocke, which I
<P 25>
did, though with so ill health as I had much adoe to get heather
to use the helpe of some phisicke: yett I thanke God he
strengthened me to beare out the exteam distempers I was in till
I camme to this house of mine, where I thought to have rested
but a very few days, and so have gonne into Rutland againe
wheare I left my Lord; but itt pleased God to order itt
otherwise, for within 2 days after my arrivall here I fell so
extream sick as I was forced to take my bed, out of which I have
not for the space of these 6 weekes binne 3 days together, nor
yett have ventured out of my chamber; though I thanke God my
health is much better then when I cam heather. Thus, Madam, may
you see what hath soe long withheld me from sending to you, who
I now hope winter will bring to this towne, which I should be
extream glad to have confirmed by this bearer, and to hear that
you and yours have escaped free from the danger or canker of
this sickly tyme, wherein my people every whear have binne
vissited with much sickness, which hath concluded at Exton with
the death of poor Francke Markham, the newse whearof camme to me
yesterday and brought me a great deale of sorrow, haveing ever
had cause to hope, if God had spared her lyfe, she wold have
repayd my care of her with honnor
<P 26>
and comfort; whearin at her ende she hath not deseaved me,
though my hope of seeing her happily bestowed be frustrate. Had
she lived till Allhollandtyde she had died a wyfe, for I had
concluded such a match for her, as I had reason to beleive she
should have lived contentedly; but He that disposeth all things
hath provided far better for her. Other then sad newse I cannot
sende you, the rest I have to wrighte being that my mother goes
presently into Germany by my La. Elizabeth's extreame earnest
desier, and the K.'s comandement; which, the season of the yeare
considered, is so cruell a jorney I much feare how she will
passe itt. But her affection to her Highnes keeps her from being
frighted with any difficultie; and her spiritt caries her body
beyond what almost could be hoped att her years, which I trust
will not faile her in this no more then in other labors; which
my weake hand begins to do me, and makes me remember how
unexcusable my teadiousnes is, if part of the cause of itt weare
not my care to satisfie you, who shall never have cause to acuse
me of leaveing you unsatisfied, howsoever I may faile in
seremonis, in any real proofe I may give you that I am
unchangeably
   Your La=ps= most affectionat and faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
   Deare Madam, do me the honnor to keepe me in M=r= Bacon's
favor, whos good opinion I should
<P 27>
be proude to deserve in any thing wherin I can be of use to him.
Kisse litle Fred. from me, and desier him to weare the token I
send him, that he may somtymes remember he hath such a freind. I
hartely beseech Allmighty God to make him, your other, and all
He shall give you, lasting comforts.
(^Bedford House^) , from whence I shall remoove as I am able to
Harington House, and ther winter, this 9th of Sept. [\1614\] .
   To my worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis, at Broome.

<Q COR 1614 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 27>
[} [\XX. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Deare Sister,
   It is now all most a yeare since I heard from you, but have
written often to you, yett not lately by reson of the remotenes
of this plase, where I have lain in with my company this 16
weakes which hath bin the cause I coulde not wryght. I shall be
extreame glad to hear that yourselfe and little sonn is in good
helth, which is one of the cheafest occasyons of this
messenger's goinge, for England; whome I have gyven order to
macke a jorny downe to your howse in the country, if his fortune
be not to find you in London. His staye is not to be longer then
to bringe me answer of some letters which I have sent him with
to the Corte. I could wish my fortune answerable to my
affectyon, that I might show it by doing you 
<P 28>
servis Thus, commending myself very affectionately to yourselfe
and little Fredderyck, I rest in hast, Your lovinge brother, 
   T. Meautys
Julyers, October 17, 1614.
   To my deare sister, y=e= Ladie Cornewallis, present these, at
Broome Haull in Souffolcke or elsewhere.

<Q COR 1614 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 28>
[} [\XXI. COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Deare Lady, 
   You should not have had so just cause to acuse me for being
thus long without sending to you could I have told what sertayne
acount to have given you of my fortune, which finding in
ballance att my retorne out of Rutland, I still wayted to see 
which way itt would setle before I writte. Now I thanke God I
can say, that out of a very great and almost hopeles danger my
Lord of Bedford hath recovered so much health and strength as we
are out of all fear of him, and doe conseave that the violent
fever he hath had hath done him some good for his palsy, his
speach being better then itt was before he fell sick, though his
lamenes be nothing amended. His present state setts me at
liberty to follow my terme busnesses, which daylie are
multiplied upon me, and make me heavile feel the burden of a
broken estate; yett
<P 29>
doe I not doubt but by the assistance of Almighty God I shall
ear long overcum all those difficulties which at the present
contest with me. Though yesterday Sir John Haryngton hath
begunne a course in the Chaunsery against my mother, but indeed
most conserning me, wherby he will gett nothing but lost labor,
nor will itt cost me more then som few lawyers' fees and a litle
troble, which I am borne to, and therfore imbrace it as part of
my portion. I extreamly desier to hear wheather your ill health
this sommer have had so happy an issue as I hoped it wold, which
lett me intreatt you by this bearer I may, and wheather you have
any purpos to see London this winter or no, be cause, if you
have not, I will then send to you againe before the ende of the
terme. Your cousin Killegrew is gonne to see your neyghbour for
a while, nothing altered. My La. Uvedale is become the fonde
mother of a sonne. My La. Marquis
<P 30>
of Winchester is dead, and our noble freind my Lord Mounteagle
very ill of a swelling in his throat. John Elviston died on
Tuesday last, to the great griefe of all good daunsers. My La.
of Roxbrough grows big, and lookes her for about the latter ende
of the next month or begineing of December, which I fear will
draw me to more attendance then of late I have putt myselfe
unto. My mother affectionately salutes you, and this is all the
nuese this dull towne afords; else by this you may see I should
be easily invited to lengthen my letter, which now I will
conclude with my best wishes to M=r= Bacon, little Fred., and
yourselfe, that have no whear a faithfuller freind then 
   L. Bedford 
Bedford House, this 27th of October [\1614\] .
   To my worthy freind the La. Cornewallis att Broome.

<Q COR 1614 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 31>
[} [\XXII. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Dere Sister,
   Yors by my footeman I receved the 2. of this month. You maye
conceve how wellcome theye were to me, that have nott receved
any from you allmost in a yeare before, though I vnderstand by
yor letters that you haue wrytten many; and if it will please
you to giue creditt to what I wright, for hathe there bin writt
by me vnto yo=r= selfe, w=th= assewrence I speacke it, aboue 20,
far be it from any thought of mine to neglect you, soe mucth as
you charge me w=th= it in yo=r= letter; butt yf you haue nott
receued soe often from me as I haue sent, lett yo=r= charytie be
soe mucth to yor absent brother as nott to macke an ill
construcktion of his affectionate indevours, w=ch= will be ever
sucth as shall still gane from you more open loufe. As for any
ill newes that you did forbare to wright, I thanck God, and I
hope I haue known the worst of all that I coulde hear, and
therfore when I vnderstud by my footeman that yo=r= selfe and
little Frederic was in health, I assewered my selfe that you
coulde right me nothinge that was ill; but my lackee tolde me
newes as I coulde scase beleue, till it was confermed vnder
yo=r= hand, that you weare maryed, w=ch= was newes too on that I
had som assewerence too the contrary. I shall
<P 32>
wish you yo=r= content in all thinges, and will praye for it, as
all soe for the health and well fare of yo=r= little sonn, whome
I hear grows grate. You may imagen how dificult a thinge it is
for me too send over vnto you, for from the place from whence
this coms it is very nere 250 myles too the seae side. I shall
for this time troble you noe furder; butt dooe intreat that I
maye be remembered vntoo my sister Shute. From home I haue nott
harde sence I left England. Soe in hast I rest yo=r= very
lovinge brother,
   T. Meautys.
Julyers, Desember the 7, 1614.
   If you please, you maye returne a rememberance from me too
yo=r= husband, if that in yo=rs= came by his direction.
   To my dere sister the Ladie Cornwallis, att her house att
Broome in Suffolcke, these.

<Q COR 1615 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 32>
[} [\XXIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
   Neither the convenyencies of the plase, nor the opertunytie
of messengers, dear sister, hath afforded me meanes too send
vnto you; besides, I haue. bin haulfe discurridged in regarde
that I haue receeved noe ansers of my letters this twellmonth
<P 33>
w=ch= I haue sent onto you, yett I hope that I am nott holy
forgotten, but rather I thincke that you want the comoditie to
send as well as my selfe. You shall favour me mutch to haue a
charytable oppinnyon of me, and to salute little Fredireck from
me, whome I wish maye remaine to yo=r= mutch comfort.
   Yo=r= assewred lovinge brother,
   T. Meautys.
Julyers, October the 2. 1615.

<Q COR 1615 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 33>
[} [\XXIV. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }]
Bedford House, this [^BLANK IN THE TEXT^] of December [\1615.\]
Deare Cornewallis,
   Because your woeman went so sodainely out of the towne as my
letters fayled comming tyme enough to goe by her, I send this
bearer, by whos jorney I shall not only have the means to bring
myselfe to your remembrance, whear I desier to live as your most
affectionat freind, but the contentment to hear how you and
yours doe. If I might also by him understand that M=r= Bacon and
you wold shortly be in towne, itt wold be very wellcome newse to
me that am like to be a Londoner the most of this winter, to
ayer my house at Twicknam against the spring. I am shuer the
<P 34>
busnesses now a foote hear flie over all the kingdom, and
therfore cannot be unknown to you; yett Sir Thomas Monson's
being sent this morning to the Tower perhaps will not be so
soone with you by any other hand as by this letter; therfore itt
tells you of that, and that the change of his prison is a signe
ther is more to be laid to his charge then what consernes
Overbury's death only. My La. of Somersett is not yett brought
to bed, but this is her last day of reckoning. Whear and when
this tragedy will ende I thinke God only knows; to whom, with my
best devotion, I com~ende you, and beg of you that no omission
of seremonis may make you thinke me the lesse
   Your faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
   Sweet Madam, comend me to M=r= Bacon and continue me in his
good opinion, which I will be ever ready to deserve by any
office of an affectionat freind.

<Q COR 1616 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 35>
[} [\XXV. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Cornewallis,
   Had I not continually for a long tyme expected your coming
up, it had been more needfull for me then you to have excused so
long a silence. Now, having that to allege for myselfe, I will
tell you that I cannot so easily forgett the many proofes I have
had of your affection as for the omission of any seremony to
suspect itt. I should have binne extream sorry to hear of your
children not being well, if withall I had not heard so good
newse of ther amendment, whos health I will hartely pray may so
fast increase as I may see both you and them shortly hear, which
I know cannot be but that I shall have M=r= Bacon's company too,
whos good opinion and love I shall ever declare my redines to
observe whensoever I shall be so happy as to know any ocation
whearby I may wittnes what I am to him for his owne worth and
your sake, whos 
   Most faithfull and affectionat freind I am,
   L. Bedford.
Whight hall, in hast, this Good-friday at 12 o'clock [\1616\] .
   My La. of Roxbrough is so near her tyme as she is not able to
wait, which tyes me to a very strickt attendance. Her sonne is
dead. My La.
<P 36>
of Somersett is sent to the Tower, and will be very shortly
arraigned. The Queen's leg is holle; to prevent a relapse, as
soone as the K. is gonne, she retornes to Grenwich and enters
into a diet this spring. This is all the newse I can wright you.
   To my worthy friend the La. Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1616 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 36>
[} [\XXVI. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Dere Sister,
   The commoditie of this bearer, whome I vnderstand to be of
yo=r= partes, hath made me to wright vnto you; for, sence som
letters w=ch= I wrytt in Desember last by Dennis that was my
footeman, I haue not hard from you, neither of him that I
imployed, w=ch= is now nere haulfe a yeare sence his goinge over
that I haue vnderstood of him. Yo=u= shall favour me beyounde my
merritt to lett me vnderstand of yo=r= helth w=th= the wellfare
of yo=r= sonn, and the rest, yf God hath sent yo=u= any by this
yo=r= husbande. I shall for my perticular, beinge absent, praye
effectually that all the contentments in this worlde maye attend
you and those that shall com of you; therefore I must ende, and
rest allwayes,
   Yo=r= faythfull lovinge brother, T. Meatys.
Julyers, Maye the 9. 1616.
   To the Ladie Cornwallis att Broome, my affectionate dere
sister, giue these, in Suffolke.

<Q COR 1616 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 37>
[} [\XXVII. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\]
}] 
Deare Cornewallis,
   This day I could not meet you because the rest of our company
could not be ther, and tomorrow my La. of Roxborough's busnes,
whom I must not forsake, will passe a triall, so as I can
neither goe my jorney nor hope to see you, if you goe away on
Wensday, before your retorne into the contry, which I am extream
sory for; but I will in the morninge send to you againe eyther
my farewell or to reseave the good newse that you goe not so
soone, which if you doe not, I will, God willing, com to you on
Wensday, till when I kisse your hands. In extream hast, with the
best affection of Your most faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford. 
Grenwidge, this Monday night att 7 o'clock [\1616\] .

<Q COR 1616? LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 38>
[} [\XXVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF
BEDFORD TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Madam,
   Because I putte you by such a messenger to a needles troble
to read thes lines, they shall only beseech you to take from him
all the assurance of my love, and desier to manifest itt, that
an honest hart can professe, till I have the happines to see you
myselfe, which I hope God will not denie me before your tyme of
deliverance; though I am not able to sett a sertain day when, by
reason of my building and som busnes I have with the dilatory
Chancellor of the Exchequer. So soone itt cannot be as I wish,
that long extreamly to tell you how unalterably I am
   Your most affectionat freind to serve you,
   L. Bedford.
From the More, this Wensday morning, in hast.
   To my noble and worthy freind the La. Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1616 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 38>
[} [\XXIX. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Deere Sister,
   I haue receued yo=rs= by this post, and in readinge of it I
remaned awhyle betwyxt hope and dispare till sutch time as I
grew towards the eand of yo=r= letter, whereby I founde the
grate cause yo=u= had to feare the well farr of my littl kinsman
in regard
<P 39>
of his longe sickness; butt, vnderstandinge that it was an
ageue, I hope that you shall nott need to doubte any danger of
him att this present. Yf my prayers may any waye availe him or
yo=u= or yo=rs=, I coulde be contented to tourne beadsman all my
life for to dooe yo=u= that charitable servis; in the meane tim
my earnest indeavou att all tims shall nott be wantinge booth
for yo=u= and all yo=rs=. Yo=r= kinde concleution in yo=r=
letter I must eauer rest yo=r= debtor for; it is yo=r= worth,
and nott my meritt, that eauer coulde deserve soe mutch loue
from you. Conserneinge Rosseter whome I did imploye for England
3 months agoe, w=th= speciall letters booth to yo=r= selfe and
other frinds, I haue nott since his goinge eauer hearde from him
nor whatt is becom of my letters, w=ch= mackes me to more then
wounder att this discomfitir, for I made choyse of him as on
that I did asshewer myselfe I might repose trust in; and yf that
hee haue plaide the knaue w=th= me, if eauer villin deserved to
be broken upon a wheele hee deserves it. I will att this time
forbeare to troble you any furder, intreating yo=u= that my
affection and loue may be remembered to yo=r= selfe, my brother,
and my little kindred, whome I praye God to send yo=u= much joy
and comfort of in this worlde. Soe in hast I rest, 
   Yo=r= affectionate louinge brother to my last ower, 
   T. Meautys.
[\1616.\]
   To his deere sister the Ladie Cornewalleys at Broome,
Suffolcke, these.

<Q COR 1616 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 40>
[} [\XXX. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Deare Cornewallis,
   If your lines are ever exceedinge wellcome to me, both
because they comme from you and that they bringe with them the
assurance of the continuance of your affection to me, which I
infinitly prise and will never live not to deserve with the best
proofes I can ever give you of mine, which I must acknowledge
but a dew debt to you, as is the vissit I owe you at your owne
house; which that I have not according to my promis performed
ther hath binne no fault in my will, nor other hindrance then
His that disposeth of His, att His, not our pleasure, and, as I
formerly writte to you, made my health such all the last sommer,
and till itt was within this very few weakes, as I was forsed to
setle hear and breake all my purposes to recover my selfe owt of
a very ill state of body; which I thanke God I have now so donne
as I hope I shall be as well able to travell againe as ever, and
if I be so I will, if beyond my power to helpe I be not againe
prevented, see you att Broome before my goeinge into Germany,
wheather my duty to my mother and her Highnes will carry me this
springe if I be forsed, as I thinke I shall, to use the helpe of
the Spaw for the confirmacion of my health and 
<P 41>
prevention of som infirmities I have of late years been subject
to, for which Mayerne counsells me to goe theather, which I
shall doe with much the more willingnes that I may wayte by that
ocasion on my mother, who crossed the sea theatherward on
Thursday last, and I hope landed well that night at Callis,
though I have not yett heard so much. I have not forgotten to
putte the Queen in mind of her promis to you, but in that as all
others she is sloe in performance; I will not be so in
soliciting her till you have your desier in that as I wishe itt
you in all else with as much unfainednes as I do any good to,
   Your most affectionat, most faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
   Doe me the favor to comend me affectionatly to M=r= Bacon.
   (^Bedford House^) , whear I am stayed in expectation of the
Queen's daylie remoove to Wight Hall, which hath binne hindred
by paine in, her foote; this Sunday morninge, in hast [\1616\] .
   To my dear and worthy freind the La. Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1616 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 41>
[} [\XXXI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Madam,
   I thinke myself infinitely beholding to you for your kindly
sending this bearer; but indeed you doe me wrong to beleive I
should have been gladder of any bodie's company in my jorney
then of yours,
<P 42>
and should sooner have invited any of my freinds to have donne
me that honor. But till very lately I was not assured wheather I
should have gotten leave to goe or no, and, when I did obtaine
itt, itt was with this condicion, that I should not invite
others to the like jorney, which I do so punctually observe as I
take nonne eyther man or woeman with me but my owne servants; so
as you see I have not binne left to my owne liberty in this,
which if I had, be assured I should have intreated both you and
M=r= Bacon to have seen the Hage with me, as thos of whos
willingnes to doe me all honnor I am most confident, and whos
companies wold have binne of extream contentment to me. If M=r=
Bacon passe this way this sommer, I wish itt may be while I am
ther, wheather, if God give me health, I intend to sett forward
from hence on Tusday or Wensday comse'night, and to stay ther
till towards the 20th of August, before the end of which month I
must, if I live, of necessity be in England; from whence, though
ther be litle ods between crossing the Theams and sea, I part
not without so settling my estate as, whatsoever becom of me,
every one shall be shewr of ther owne, and you not be prejudised
by your kindnes to me, to whos days and comforts I beseech God
Almighty to adde many, and to give me means to expresse how
affectionatly I am Your most faithfull and thankefull freind,
   L. Bedford.
<P 43>
   I will not faile to obey you to the Queen of Bohemia, nor to
make such mention of you as become my love and knowledge of you.
Harington House, this 12th of July [\1616\] .
   To my worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1617 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 43>
[} [\XXXII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY CONTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Madam,
   It troubled me much that you should thinke me so negligent as
not to have written to you againe upon so many sommons as itt
semes the messenger of your last sayth he gave me: but in my
excuse I must first say, the letter was left hear in my absence,
and sertainly so hath his caulings binne for an answer, if at
all; for I have examined all my servants to whom I thought itt
likely he might have addressed himselfe, and neyther I nor they
can remember any such matter. Yett perhaps the fault hath not
binne his neyther, soe he may well have binne often hear and
missed me; for som litle building I have in hand att the More,
or other busnesses thear, against our goeing theather this
sommer, hath for thes many weekes carried me often from hom.
Shewr I am neyther want of affection or desier to make all
demonstrations therof hath kept my letters from you, which I
desier you will believe, and that the long 
<P 44>
deferring of my promis to vissitt you hath binne inforsed by
those occasions I could not avoid; but this sommer I hope to
find a tyme more freely mine to dispose of, though I cannot yett
name any, being to attend a bargain I am making with my Lo. of
Buckingham's officers for the fee farme of Combe, which will
carry me sooner or later theather, as we conclude or breake: but
I will first injoine you to give me your word, that you shall
not make my coming eyther a troble or a charge for you. This
dull towne afords nothing worthy the wrighting, for ther is
almost nobody of quality left in itt. Of the Queen's court I can
say litle good, for her resolution to part with Roxbrough still
continues, which makes her looke big upon all she thinkes loves
that good woeman, and they attend her very seldom: of which
matter I am one that price her favor, but upon such an occasion
cannot be sorry for her frownes, which are now 
<P 45>
litle to me, all my court busnesses being so dispatched as they
will not much requier my attendance ther; and I am growne to
love my ease and liberty so well as no measuer of favor could
often invite me theather, whear ther is no hope of any good to
be donne. My Lo. Mownteagle and my Lo. Chandos are very shortly
goeing to the Spaw, though not togethear; for my Lo. Mownteagle
is growne so in love with a plentifull fortune and a privat
injoyeing therof, as he shuns all other conversation. When they
are gonne ther will scarse be a gentleman to be seen about this
towne, whence I shall not stirre till after Midsommer terme. Out
of Scotland I hear no newse but that the Inglish of quality are
very kindly and royally entertained by the nobility, but the
meaner sort not so well used by the common people; which trobles
the K. extreamly, who entertains all the noblemen went with him
not as servants but guests. This is all his jorney hath yett
brought forth. By the next you can send to London by, lett me
know when you looke you, that I may not apoint to com to you att
an unseasonable tyme; and I beseech you be more confident in my
love to you then to suspect the declination therof upon the
omission of any seremony, which I confesse I am often guilty of
towards my freinds, though never willingly of any such neglect
as may
<P 46>
give them a just cause to suspect me; which you shall never
have, but all the proofes in my power that I am as much as you
can wishe, or is in me to be to any,
   Your most faithfull and affectionat freind,
   L. Bedford.
   I am very glad to hear by M=rs= Kendrick that your children
are so well. He that hath given them you, give you with them all
the comforts children can be to a mother. Lett my best wishes be
remembred to M=r= Bacon as I make them for him, and give me
leave to entreate you to do me the favor to lett som servant of
yours carry the ten peeses I have delivered this bearer to
Norwidge, whence I have had two letters lately from the fine
M=r= Russell who itt seems the fayr Queen hath forsaken, for he
wrights me word he is ther prisoner, in the under sheriff's
house, in great necessity; and it wear a great pitty so
compleate a foole should starve, yett I am loth to send on
purpose so farre to his worship.
Harington House, this 26th of May [\1617\] .
   To my dear and worthy freind the La. Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1617 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 47>
[} [\XXXIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF
BEDFORD TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Madam, - I have nothing to acuse you of, though you cannot
but condemne me as a promis breaker, and so unmannerly a one as
not
<P 47>
so much as to have excused myselfe to you; but I must treuly
protest that every weeke since my coming out of Warwickshier I
have binne setting a day to com to you. From thence I was forsed
to follow the K. by his com~andement for the setling of a busnes
I have long had in hand for his servis and my profitt, and so
could not gett the liberty of 2 or 3 days to goe into Rutland,
nor since my coming to this towne to leave itt so many days as
wold have brought me to you and backe againe; which I protest I
have as much desired as I now do any thing, and resolve if you
com up this winter, which I am putte in som hopes you will, to
lett you see neither winter weather nor ways can fright me from
performing before Chrismas what I could not in the sommer;
though I should be extream glad to hear we should meete in this
good towne, because then I should hope to be much the longer in
your company, and to have your advise and M=r= Bacon's in my
workes att the More, whear I have binne a patcher this sommer,
and I am still adding som trifles of pleasure to that place I am
so much in love with, as, if I wear so fond of any man, I wear
in hard case. The last busness of this letter is, to beg of you
the knowledge how you and yours doe, and the favor I may be
affectionatly remembred to M=r= Bacon, and ever by you, as in
all essentiall things I will be found, the trewest of your
freinds,
   L. Bedford.
<P 48>
   The Queene hath binne very ill of late, but is now well
againe. The noble Lady Roxbrough is in Scotland, which makes me
perfectly hate the court.
Bedford House, this 22d of October [\1617\] .
   To my very worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1618 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 48>
[} [\XXXIV. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF
BEDFORD TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Madam,
   Itt wold have eased me of a great deale of care if I might by
your servant have heard that you had recovered better health;
which good newse since I cannot yett reseave, I will content
myselfe with this hope, that this sicknes will in the ende pay
you much comfort for the payne and troble it putts you to, and
so make me amends that am by itt denied your company, which I so
much desired, as I also did M=r= Bacon's, but not with the least
wishe to deprive you in this state of your greatest comfort. Som
other tyme, I hope, will be more fortunat to me then this any
way is, and nonne shall I esteem more so then that which may
bring forth an oportunity for me to testify the unfaynednes of
that respect hath so often binne vowed unto you by your most
affectionat and faythfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
Huntingdon, this 11th of April [\1618\] .
<P 49>
   My Lo. Mownteagle and Sir Francis Goodwinne affectionatly
kisse your hands, as I do M=r= Bacon's. You have sent me a
present I so much esteem as I know not how to find you
sufficient thankes for itt, and can only acknowledge itt to be
the finest I ever saw of this kind.
   To my worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis. 

<Q COR 1618 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 49>
[} [\XXXV. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Madam,
   I thinke the tyme too long since I heard from you and cannot
longer rest doubtfull how you and yours do, which makes me send
this messenger, by whom I also desier to understand wheather you
intend to com to London this spring as I was told, which I
should be extream glad of, because I should the oftener and
longer have your company; but, if you do not, I have now so
setled those letts of my busnesses have heatherto hindred the
performance of my promis to vissitt you, as I can now, if God
Almighty continue my health, make good may word whensoever you
will after S=t= George's day, when the ways will be fairer and
the weather better for a jorney, by which I promis myselfe a
great deale of pleasure in surveinge your good huswyfery: sooner
I could and wold comme to you, if you wold have itt so, but that
som occasions
<P 50>
of my owne and my freinds make me not a free woeman till the K.
goe to Newmarkett or Theatford, which will not be before that
tyme. Till then, if ther be any thing hear whearin I may serve
you, lett me know itt; and if I do itt not with as much care and
affection as possible for a faithfull freind, never beleeve
again that I have any treuth in me, or am worthy to bear the
title of your most unfainedly loveing freind, L. Bedford.
Bedford House, this 7th of March [\1617-18\] .
   I had almost forgotten an earnest request I am to make by you
to M=r= Bacon, but that a tricke my Lo. of Arundell putt upon me
yesterday to the cusning me of some pictures promissed me, putt
me in mind of itt. I was told the last night that your father in
law was like to die, and that he had som peeses of painting of
Holben's; which I am shewr, as soon as Arundell hears, he will
trye all means to gett: but I beseech you entreate M=r= Bacon,
if they will be parted with to any, to lay hold of them afore
hand for me, who better than any other I am shewr may prevale
with his brother, to whos share I conseave they will falle; for
I am a very diligent gatherer of all I can gett of Holben's or
any other excellent master's hand; I do not care at what rate I
have them for price, but shall thinke itt an extraordinary favor
if M=r= 
<P 51>
Bacon can procure me those, or any others, if he know any such
therabouts, upon any conditions; whos judgement is so
extraordinary good as I know nonne can better tell what is worth
the haveing. Som of those I have, I found in obscure places, and
gentleman's houses, that, because they wear old, made no
reckoning of them; and that makes me thinke itt likely that ther
may yett be in divers places many excellent unknown peeses, for
which I lay wayghte with all my freinds; and when M=r= Bacon
coms to London, he shall see that though I be but a late
beginner, I have prety store of choise peeses. Dear Madam, lett
me hear by this bearer, wheather I have not binne misinformed
concerning thes pictures, and if I have not, make them shewr
eyther for me or nobody; and be not curious to thinke I may pay
too much, for I had rather have them then juels. If any copies
of them be desired, I will retorne such as he must
extraordinarily well know paintings, that shall distinguish them
from the originalls.
   To my dear and worthy friend the Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1618 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 51>
[} [\XXXVI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF
BEDFORD TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Cornewallis, 
   If this honest man had not offered me a means to convaigh
these lines to you, I had sent a footeman
<P 52>
of my owne with them, to lett you know that though business hear
falls out crossely to my purpos of coming to you this tyme as
can be, (the K.=s= jorney to Theatford being stayed,) yett
nothing shall make me leave you longer in doubt that I make
promisses to you I intend not to performe; therefore you may be
confident that if the hand of God Almighty impose not the
contrary, I will be with you about a fortnight hence, though I
cannot yett name the certain day, because I can~ot well leave
this towne till the Court removes to Grenwidge, which will be
about that tyme, but no day yett sett; my stay with you will be
so short as I wish you wold resolve my journey might be to fetch
you to London; whear I might have yo=r= company longer, for
necessity will compel me to goe and come post, and rest but one
day with you; which I know you will alowe when you shall
understand the occasions command my being hear, which I reserve
till we meet; hoping that desired tyme to be now so near, yett
so long I will not defer all my thankes to M=r= Bacon; of whos
care to do me the kindnes I unmannerly desired of him for some
good pieses of paintinge, your chaplain hath been a faithful
relator and made me a thankelesser debtor; which you both shall
find if ever it be in my power to witness how unfeignedly I am 
   Your faithfullest freind, L. Bedford.
[\April 1618.\]
   To my dear and worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis. 

<Q COR 1618 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 53>
[} [\XXXVII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF
BEDFORD TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Cornewallis,
   You may see how unable they are to dispose of their own tymes
that attend debts and other occasions, by my no sooner sending
you word when I will be with you, which now I intend, by God's
permission, to be on Tuesday com se'night att night, & staying
with you all Wensday; but on Thursday you must give me leave to
retorne homewards, for I must needs be hear againe on Friday
night. I wright this in extream haste, therefore excuse me that
I saye no more but that I will ever be found 
   Y=r= most affectionat & faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
Bedford House, this 7th of May [\1618\] .
   To my honorable frend the Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1618 MBOURCHIER>
<A MARY BOURCHIER>
<G F>
<P 54>
[} [\XXXVIII. MARY COUNTESS OF BATH TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\]
}]
Sweet Syster,
   I must needs give you great thaynks for your rare and
bountefull present; no meat in the woorld coold have ben so
welcome. Evne at such a tyme as I coold not bee pleased with any
meat to pleas my stomake, notwithstandyng I was sike of a cheken
yester night, yet I coold eat thys with desyre, and yet not sike
of it, but my fitts never of mee. God give me paciens. I pray
God send you a happy jorny and a safe and quik retorn. I have
adventured to send you thys poor playn cakes, not so good as I
wish thay were. Had I had any thynge of worth, I woold in deed
have ... which in thees ragget lyns I seek to excuse. I have so
many charges as I am determined to let my gowne aloane; but if
you will doo mee the favour to by mee so much meane stufe,
canvas, or what stufe you pleas, of black and whyt, to make mee
a wastcot for everye daye, you shall doo mee a great favour. I
have stufe by mee will serv for thys loan plas, to make mee a
playn gowne. If you pleas to get mee a black fann bought, I will
leve troblyng of your La. but never leve lovyng you. I wished,
as I comanded thys bearer to tell you, that you shoold not loose
so much of your
<P 55>
presias tyme of entertaynyng and injoying so honorable a
parsnach, but put it in your poket till you come at London; and
so I bid you a harty farwell, resting your La'ps lovyng
unfortunat syster,
   Mary Bathon.
xx of May [\1618\] .
   I am bold to send thees letters to which of your attendans
you pleas to comand, to get them delyvered.
   To my lovyng honorable syster, the La. Cornwaleys, give
these.

<Q COR 1618 MBOURCHIER>
<A MARY BOURCHIER>
<G F>
<P 55>
[} [\XXXIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^MARY BATHON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Syster,
   Love doth most perfitly shyne when it is steeled in
adversity. Age in thys world is of most young folkes much
declined. The strongest estat I stand in maketh mee of no
esteem, and that which I profes, and cannot, without
desemulacion to God and the world, bee otherwise, maketh mee
condemned of the most base; but our Savyor's example, if I were
as I shoold bee, might make mee thynke myselfe to suffer for Hym
that suffered for us all; but my weknes is such as, were not my
hope in His mercye that He will not suffer mee to put up with my
cruell fitts, were able to distract me. I protest your kind
vesetacion ded much
<P 56>
relieve my vexed mind, which made mee apeer to your L. as
impotent in mynd as body, which your good dysposecion I well
perseved tooke commisseracion on, and made you pleased to troble
yourselfe to give mee comfort in desyryng mee to come upon
Monday, which daye or any daye I will, if you pleas to send, and
shall, if my fitts bee not too vement, by God's gras come; but,
were it your pleasure, I had rather defer it till Thursdaye, but
that by that tyme I dought your strangers will bee come, and I
cannot but thynke compynyghe shoold bee troblesum to you at thys
tyme, if you knowe any comynge. Sweet La. doo not send for mee.
When you come home agayne, by God's gras you shall not keepe mee
so long from seeing your, who will ever remayn 
   Your fathfull lovyng syster f=m= hart, the
   most unfortunat Mary Bathon.
[\1618.\]
   To my honorable lovyng syster, the La. Cornwaleys.

<Q COR 1618 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 56>
[} [\XL. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Dear Madam,
   I send this messenger to bring me word how you, M=r= Bacon, &
all your little ones doe, and by him send my servant Fred. a
sword to defend him from the malice of the buckes in this their
<P 57>
colericke season. This monthe putts me in minde to intreate the
performance of your promisse for som of the little white single
rose rootes I saw att Brome, & to chalenge M=r= Bacon's promis
for som flowers, if about you ther be any extraordinary ones;
for I am now very busy furnishing my gardens. Thus you see itt
is not good being too free an offerer to a free taker; but be
not discouraged, for I shall be as free a requiter whensoever
you shall make me know itt is in my power. I can not send you
much newse from hence: the best is, that after many difficultis
I have made an end, according to my wishes, of my busness with
the K. & reseaved his graunt, with many excuses for the delays
it hath had, and so much complimente as hath made amends; the
worst, that the Queen hath bled extreamly of late, wh=h= hath so
weakened her as I much fear how she will recover itt, for I
never saw her look so dangerously ill, w=ch= makes me oftener a
courtier than I intended, and, with my other ocasions, will, I
think, draw me to winter att London, whear I should be glad to
hear you minded to go. Howsoever, I thinke I shall invite you
towards the spring to do my niese an honor, if I can compose
things according to my wishes; an offer being made me for her
pleases me well, & I doubt not will take effect, if her
unreasonable father can be brought to do what he ought, which if
love
<P 58>
will not make him, I hope fear will prevaile: but of this lett
no speache passe you, because itt is yett too early days; but as
soone as itt is settled to any certainty, & that the K. hath
declared himselffe, whos work it is, you shall hear of itt more
perticularly from me, to whom itt will be of a great deal of use
& comfort, if itt pleas God to prosper itt. So may He blesse all
yo=r= indevors, & continue to adde to yo=r= happiness which is
not more hartily wished by any than by your most affectionat &
faithful freind, L. Bedford.
More Lodge, this 4th of October [\1618\] .
   To my noble & dear freind the Lady Cornewallis, att Brome.

<Q COR 1618 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 58>
[} [\XLI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Cornewallis,
   I must not lett this bearer retorne without my intreaty to
you that to mine you will joyne your thankes to M=r= Bacon for
the favor he hath donne me in furnishing me with such helpes for
my garden, and lett me beg itt of you both that you will believe
that I shall be gladder to deserve then reseave obligacions from
you, though the demonstrations of good will to me are not
wellcommer
<P 59>
from any then your selves, whos love I infinitely prise, and
requite with the best affection of 
   Your most affectionat and faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford. 
Bedford House, in haste, this 6th of November [\1618\] .
   To my noble and worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis, att
Broome.

<Q COR 1619 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 59>
[} [\XLII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Cornwallis,
   It is one of my misfortunes, and such a one as I assure you I
am very sensible of, to be thus farre from you in a tyme
whearein I perseave your love wold have made me that to you
which I as affectionatly desier to be as to have myselfe the
comfort of a freind by me, when any opresion lies heavy on my
hart, to whom I might trust my cares, and be shuer they should
not only be safely lodged, but begett a desier to ease them as
farre as wear possible, or at leaste advise how to make them
lightest. I remember well what itt was you feared at your last
being in towne, and I am sorrier then I can tell you, that ther
is such a resemblance in our destines as makes you, like me, a
trew professer to yourselfe of ills to comme, whearin I have
seldom failed. But, for all that, you must not loose couradge,
nor let your kind sensiblenes, which if the self-wordingest
thing, make 
<P 60>
you so unkind to yourselfe and yours as to yeald up the strength
of your resisting reason, and consent to sincke under that
melancoly such heartofore unexpected distaste must needes breed
in you, which I grieve hartely to heare hath already rought so
ill effects upon your health, and so strong aprehencions in your
minde, though I trust our good God will with a safe deliverance
of a happy bearth restore you the one, and, if you be not
wanting to yourselfe, so assist you as you shall to your
contentment overcomme what causes the other; and which, when you
have recovered strengthe of body againe, if you finde to
continue, in my opinion you should do well to remoove heather,
whear you will have better meanes to prevail, and shall have my
servis, if you finde itt may be fitt for you to imploye me, or
shall finde that of others of more power then my owne, by
declaring that I have ingaged them to take care of you, may
becomme of use to you in this ocacion, who I dare undertake
shall do itt very willingly and readily, and perhaps itt wold
not be to ill purpos if ther be cause. I am shuer you beleeve
ther are not many for whom I durst ingadge my word to you so
freely, and therfore will easily judge that I offer you the
servis but of two; but if those two give you not a good acount
of what I promis in ther names, sett it on my score as a
falsehoode. I should be glad you would resolve
<P 61>
to bringe up your children and familie, because I thinke itt
wold be best for them and you; but if on the sodain you cannot
acomodate yourselfe with a convenient house for them all, if itt
please you to lett me have your companie heare while you are
provideing yourselfe with a convenient dwelling for your hole
companie, you shall do me a very great pleasure, and, though my
Lord should be in towne, no whitt straiten me, for I can well
spare your wonted lodgings. Therfore, if you love me, be not
scrupulous to make use of them. Itt is now high tyme that I
acknowledge the reseit of both your letters by this bearer, and
withall how I aprehend your kindnes so many ways expressed to me
in them; but no words can do itt, and so I beseech you to
believe, because itt is trew; and, besides that, I am farre from
undervaluing, for misinterpret I cannot, the liberality you
therein have used towards me, which is much more then ever I was
a debtor for to any that aught itt not unto me, or then I have a
hart or will to accept, if I durst at this tyme say I wold
refuse what you so presse, which your kindnes only and the
knowledge of your disposicion takes off the shame I have so long
detained, yett I will now keepe itt in my hands as you will have
me; though I must still as your tresurer, not as a legacy, and
that you will live to give me tyme when I shall leave the world,
[{and{] be wittnes I am not behind hand with 
<P 62>
you in affection, and desier to live in your memory ... be
confident that ther is nonne of yours to whom I will be more
wanting in any thing I may do for them then I wold have binn to
my owne if God had continued me a mother; and whear as your
request is in general, and extends to nothing but what I hope
you believe not so ill of me as to thinke I wold not without itt
have donne, and more, I beseech you; if you can thinke itt to
any purpos, impose something more perticularly on me, for I will
perform itt as I desier God should have mercie on me, joyfullie
I confesse in your life, but as faithfully if I outlive you;
which wheather I doe or not, they shall be no loosers by what
you have donne for me, that have at the present but prayers to
the Almighty to repaye you with, which shall be offered up with
the best devocyon of 
   Your faithfully loving and thankfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
Harington House, this 20th of January [\1618-19.\]
   I will, God willing, the next week send to inquier of your
state, of which I hope to heare as I desier.
   To my worthy and dear friend the La. Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1619 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 63>
[} [\XLIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF
BEDFORD TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Cornewallis,
   I send this bearer to inquire of my sicke freinds, into which
number I am extream sorry to hear M=r= Bacon is fallen, both for
his own sake and yours, and as desirous as any can be to hear of
his amendement, which I hartely pray for, and hope to reseave
the good newse of att this messenger's retorne. I heard not of
his being ill till my Lo. Chamberlain told me of itt, and that
upon that occasion you had excused your selfe from coming to the
Queen's funeral, whear I hoped to have seen you, and am doubly
sory upon this occasion to faile of that contentment; ear long I
trust a happier one will bring us with gladnes to meete, which I
wish to you in as great a measure as I do to
   Your most affectionat freind and servant,
   L. Bedford.
   The K. is earnest to have the funeral hastened, and sayth itt
shall be on Saturday com se'night; but, for all that, I thinke
itt will not be till this day fortnight.
Bedford House, in haste, this Thursday morning,
[\April 1619.\]

<Q COR 1619 MBOURCHIER>
<A MARY BOURCHIER>
<G F>
<P 64>
[} [\XLIV. MARY COUNTESS OF BATH TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Lady,
   I desyre much to here of your perfit recovery of helth and
strenth after your great payne, and God send you much joye of
your last sonn, and no less of your first. I hard latly by Roben
Cornwaleys you sent to have borowed my plat, which I ded
fathfully offer, and such poor lynnen as I hade. Because you sed
nothynge, I ded put it bye, and carry awaye the keys; but,
knowing mee as thaye ded, thaye myght have broken up the loke. I
was, I protest, hartyly ayngry thaye ded not; and yet, if you
have any furder cause, I have willed you shall have it of my
fayth, and take any desyre from you in such kynde, as I doo
thynke you love mee, otherwayes I woold not have bene so bold
with you as I have bene many tymes. Sweet Lady, if you have
cause to use it before I come home, I have sent the keys by thys
bearer to the same purpose. I hope to bee at home the
latterendyng or the begynynge of thys next weeke. I have had my
helthe very well ever syns I came hether till the last
Weddensdaye; syns, I have bene very ill, and am not well at thys
present. God
<P 65>
give mee gras to submit my will too hys pleasure; and I beseech
Almightie God send Sir Edmund Bacon to escape hys peryles
syknes, and you helth and many years. I praye remember mee to my
brother Bacon and prety Frede; and so I will take my leve. My
syster desyrs to be remembred to you and my brother, not
forgettyng my littill nevewe.
   Your unfortunat lovyng syster,
   Mary Bathon
xvi of September [\1619\] .

<Q COR 1620 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 65>
[} [\XLV. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Dear Madam,
   As full of just sorrow as my hart can bear, I retorne you
affectionat thankes for your kind sending. What a mother I have
lost I need not tell you, that know what she was in herselfe,
and to me. Yett God, that sees no affliction to worke
sufficiently upon me, hath this last night added another heavie
one to my former woe, having taken my Lord Chamberlain's sonne.
Yett with 
<P 66>
this mersy to him, that he hath given him the hope of another,
my Lady. being, as we thinke, with child againe. But alas! this
is but a fearfull comfort to him and his freinds, considering
her estate, which gives him too much cause of doubt wheather she
will ever bring any well into the world or no, for sertainly
this tooke much harme by her unrulynes both in the breeding and
bearth. Yett God is all sufficient, and I trust will blesse so
good a father with the joye of leaveing som of his owne to
succeed him; and the rather am I incouraged to be confident He
will show favor to him and to the prayers of his freinds therin,
because though he was very fond of this, yett, in those tymes of
fear the child's being subject to som infirmities gave us, he
ever kept a mind ready prepared to resigne att God's pleasure so
unexpected a blessing. Now itt is com to the trial I am
confident he will show well tempered effects of that religious
resolution, and bear with pacience what the Almighty hath donne,
though itt be more to him then the losse of an only sonne to
another father. My losse of a dear mother camme not so
unexpectedly as my Lord Chamberlain's did att this tyme, for to
outward apearance his child mended, but my mother so manifestly
decayed daylie as I could not flatter myselfe with hope she
could continue long; though I looked not her ende wold have
binne so sodaine, yett the
<P 67>
disease she was subject to threatened no lesse, which I, sorting
with that opinion she ever had since I knew her, that her ende
wold be sodaine, made itt, I thanke God, not so to her, who hath
left many seremonis how well she was prepared for itt, which is
my unspeakeable comfort. Itt now rests for me to follow as well
as I can her good example, which God graunt I may, in liveing
for his servis, that I may die in his favor, whom I beseech to
blesse you and yours, and you to comende me affectionatly to
M=r= Bacon, who made me hope att his last seeing in June I
should have seen you hear before this tyme, whear you have not
so true a friend as you shall ever find your sad servant,
   L. Bedford.
Harington House, in hast, this 1st of June [\1620\] .
   To my honorable dear freind the Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1620 MBOURCHIER>
<A MARY BOURCHIER>
<G F>
<P 67>
[} [\XLVI. MARY COUNTESS OF BATH TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Lady,
   Your letter of acknowlegen more then I have or can deserve,
maketh mee ashamed of thanks for nothyng, syns I have reseved 
to frendsheps of substance for my poor thoutes of love, which is
all I can requit my best frynd withal. Sweet syster, my hart
bled when I last see you; you ded with your presenc lyten ...
from the
<P 68>
affliction of a most fearful mallyngcoly ... is now more
oppressed with the foulest abuse that ever was offred to so
innosent a person, a discors that wold take a great deal of tyme
to set down, if you will here how your poor unfortunat syster,
who hath been intolerable wronged by the Earl of Bath, who is my
lawfull husband, and nowe by a knave, who sath he is hys sonn
and I am hys mother; who hath, in my consyens, lyne abought my
house to kill mee thys month, the most ill favored knave that
ever was seene. Syster, I had never child by my Lo. and, I take
God to bee my witness, am as innosent of thys beast, who wanteth
not much of fifty, as any chyld thys night born. And so, good
syster, bear with my unsensible wrytynge, and God in hevn
preserv you and all yours.
   Your lovyng syster, the most unfortunat
   Mary Bathon.
Thorp, thys xviii of June [\1620\] .

<Q COR 1620 MBOURCHIER>
<A MARY BOURCHIER>
<G F>
<P 68>
[} [\XLVII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^MARY BATHON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Lady,
   I thaynke you for your late vesetacion after your late long
journey, as lykwise for your wyse systerly cownsell, w=ch= my
reson doth asarten mee
<P 69>
to be the best I dought not hys love ... bee so littill too mee,
that bee woold not doo any thynge I shoold requir in so innosent
a cause as thys; but such a base roge as thys, who is known ...
was born and crestened ... of hys kinsmane, who brought them
into the contry, whos testymony I send you here inclosed, as
lykwise hys exammenacion before the iusteses of Bery, as lykwise
by them that ded comit him too the iayll, my thaynks, any on
that is a frynd to iustes ... innosensy were enough, syns my
lord cheef iustes is ... aquaynted with my woorst evill by my
neerest frynd ... lond, as my woost enymes withall ther malles,
brybes, and trayns coold or ded proove agaynst me; w=ch= snare
had not I ben trecheresly caught in, I had not ben left of my
frynds, though such a man of powr ... playe that tyn ... ther
alas no repugnyngsy, so myght thay doo and prove what thay woold
agaynst so abiect a woman, who hath ever syns not known what an
howr's true content, but sorrowe and syknes, and such an
aflykted mynde as shoold rather move ... compacion then furder
malles, to set roges to intytell them selves myne. Syster, I
here my brother hath nether coch nor horses, and, as I am told,
is abought a matter of moment for hymself, w=ch= maketh me staye
my desyne of hys being ther;
<P 70>
and for sume other resons ... cosen Thomas Cornwaleys shall
denygh mee, or els ... shall be ther by God's suffrens. If any
frynds els ... stepe in to helpe to get such a knave punneshed,
wherin my innosensy shall appeer to the woorld, I shall have
cause to thynk my self beholdyng to them, and I hope God will
reward theme. It is enough for a Crystyon ... saye that I desyre
never too see the face of God if ther bee any chyld of myn in
thys world. It hath pleased G... knowe too send or suffer
trobles of infamee, who hath as ... as I coold carryed my self
thys xxxix year unrep... Nowe for my conscyens, w=ch= I can no
more at ... without vtter dispayr of salvacion. If you can no
way helpe, yet, sweet syster, pety me; if my tears wooll wryt
black, I need no inke. Fear not thys paper, though the masels
is in my hows. I nor my howsold cam never neere the infekted;
but I pray God you nor my sweet nevew tooke no hurte, it ca...
knowlege, nether was it but suspekted ... were newly syted. I
desyre to knowe howe you ... bearer, and before my going to
Hengrave I desyre to have thees wrytyngs agayn. Accordyng to
your fryndly offer I am bold this next weeke too desyre your
horses, if you maye spare them; if I can ... any th... comand
any thyng of mee or myne
<P 71>
as your own. And so God in heven bles you and all yours rem ...
wish of all good to my bro ... Bacon.
   Your lovyng vnfortunat syster,
   Mary Bathon.
   I have sent you too of my brother's ... hard to read, w=ch=
if I in ... send a ... a pa... the daye, and I will se ... or
them and the other coppyes; and then I will namyn the daye I
shall desyre your horses, if you ... spare them, or els I besech
you let me knowe when it shall be lese convenyent to you.
[\Thorp,\] July [\1620\] .

<Q COR 1620 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 71>
[} [\XLVIII. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\]
}] 
Deare Cornewallis,
   I know that by this tyme I have deserved and undergonne much
of your censuer, if I have not lost all your favor; which to
redeem I do protest unto you that the only cause you have binne
so long without hearing from me was, that I was ashamed to send
till I could retorne you that part of your wealth you have so
long binne pleased to trust me with; to whom alone I had binne
beholding for a curtesy of this natur. Now, if you be so
crewell as you cannot forgive me this fault, 
<P 72>
please yourselfe in imposeing any punishment on me you thinke my
offence deserves, and I shall willingly undergoe itt, so itt may
purchas my pardon, which I affectionatly beg, under promis never
to be a trespasser in this kind againe. I hope to reseave itt
signed, by this bearer, who can give you an acount how I have
spent my tyme this many months; att whos retorne to me if I
might hear that you wold be shortly att London, itt wold bring
an infinit deale of contentment to 
   Your most faithfully loveing freind,
   L. Bedford
Leister, this 12th of September [\1620\] .
   To my worthy and dear freind the La. Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1620 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 72>
[} [\XLIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Madam,
   I was long in much hope that you wold have held your purpos
of coming to London this spring, wheare I have binne constrained
to be almost all this tyme since your going hence; which has
made me the greater looser by the change of your purpos, as I am
much the sorrier for that losse, since your want of health hath
binne the occasion to keep you both from hence and the More, the
places in this kingdom you may justlie chalendge to be wellcom
to while they are mine, and whear you should find yourself payd
with most affection,
<P 73>
as in all others whearsoever I am to injoye your companie; which
if I did not believe you wear confident of, itt wold be an
extreame increase of misfortune to me, since you could not
imagine any good to be in one that should requite. with less so 
many real proofes of affection as I have reseaved from you, and
for which I can make no requital I but that of loveing you very
hartely, and that I am sure I doe, and doubt not of your being
so assured; after which no more is needful to be sayd, since
that includes all in my power. You have sent me the finest litle
beaste that ever I saw, whos beauty may excuse many faults, if
she have any. How well she will play I long to be at libertie to
trie; and, howsoever she proove, she shall be much made of for
the hands' sake she comes from. Thus I am ever reseaving
kindnesses from you, for which I have no better retornes then
thankes to make; of those, dear Cornewallis, reseave the
affectionat one I send you, and when you can find any subject to
exsercise your interest in me on, be not sparing to make such
full trials from what a hart they comm. I know you have heard of
the mariadge of your neise to Sir John Radcliffe's son, and how
slightly my Lo. of Buckingham hath performed the protection
promissed to him. For the first, I assure you, your newe nephew
is as fine and towardly a youth as any I 
<P 74>
know; and for the other, my Lo. Hamilton, my Lo. Chamberlain,
and my Lo. of Mongommery have donne ther best, and will do
still, to keep off all the blows they can others' malice aymes
at her; but what the successe will be I dare not promis, so
strongly is the K. insensed and so bitter yett in the
prosecution; but I will assure you, if ther wear no other ground
but that of her blood, itt shall make me keepe warmest in my
freinds desiers to save her from publick shame, and I beseech
you, since your own vertue exsempts you from all reproch in her,
be so just to yourself as not to be afflicted with her danger. I
can wright no longer, companie interrupting me; therefore, dear
madam, farewell, and love still 
   Your most faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
Harington House, in hast, this present Tuesday [\1620\] .
   If you deliver not my affectionat salutacions to M=r= Bacon
and your sonne Fred. itt shall be the ground of a greater quarel
betwixt us then yett we ever had.
   To my dear freind the lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1620 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 75>
[} [\L. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Dear Madam,
   If you will do me the favor to lett me have your companie
hear while your busnes stayeth you in towne, your lodgings will
be ready for you tomorrow night, [{to{] which I hope you beleeve
you shall be as wellcom as ever you wear to any place, and may
as freely co~mand as when they wear your owne: so may you still,
I assure you, esteem them, as long as they be in the possession
of 
   Your trewly loveing freind,
   L. Bedford. 
Harington House, this Thursday morning [\1620\] .
   To my noble & worthy freind the La. Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1621 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 75>
[} [\LI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Madam,
   I thinke itt long since I heard of you and yours, whos well
beings and happines I most hartely desier, and send this bearer
to inquier of, beseeching you to beleeve that no abscence nor
lengthe of tyme can diminish that affection in me I have so many
years professed and you so well deserved; for, whensoever you
shall have occasion to make trial therof, you shall find all in
my power 
<P 76>
in yours to com~ande for your servis to the uttermost it can be
extended, and that I shall reckon itt a good fortune to me to be
employed by you in any thing that may give you assurance how
unfainedly I love you, whereof itt wear an extream contentment
to me if we wear nearer neighbours, that I might often tell itt
you, which I can doe no more. But itt is in this, as much more,
my happe to have much of what I wishe not, and want what I
desier. Yett I hope eare long sum good occasion will bring you
to London, from whence, exsept it be somtymes for a day or two,
I shall not sturre till after Easter terme; my neese, her
father, and I haveing bargained, she with him for the present
posession of her land, and I with her for her posibility in the
lease of Combe, which to setle thoroughly, and provide to pay
for, will coste me so long a stay heare. This donne, I intend to
turn Combe wholly into money, bothe to make myself a free woman
from debt, and with the rest of itt to rayse as good an estate
for lyfe as I can, having now nonne but myselfe to provide for;
those designes I had for my neese being crossed by her father's
untowardnes, and her owne porcion being sufficient for any
matche. Nor do I fear finding this any searious worke for her,
having a thing so well known, as I have already many offerers
for itt. So as, dear
<P 77>
Madam, the favor you have so long binne pleased to doe me, I
trust nowe very shortly to answer with a just account and
payment of your owne, and will all my lyfe remember with dewe
thankefullnes, and requite by the best means I can, having been 
donne me in such a fashion as I owne not the like to any other,
which is unfainedly acknowledged by Your greatly loveing
faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
Harington House, this 20th February [\1620-1\] .
   Sweet Madam, com~ende me affectionatly to M=r= Bacon, and
blesse your sonne Fred. in my name, as I beseech God to doe all
yours. 
   The worthy Lady Cornewallis, my noble freind.

<Q COR 1621 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 77>
[} [\LII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF BEDFORD
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
   Dear Madam, - I am extream sorry to hear you have binne so
ill, but with as much gladnes thank God for your good recovery,
whos health and happines is not more hartely wished by any
freind you have in the world; nor indeed can any be more engaged
to desier all good to you, since your constant affection to me
challenges all the thankefull retornes an indebted freind
sensible of such kindnes can make, which though I confes myselfe
in expressing seremoniously, yet I will never be found gilty of
neglecting any real proofes I 
<P 78>
may give therof when eyther you or my good fortune may calle me
to do so. I have myselfe had an unhealthfull spring of this,
which I hope will not end in a lame leg, and that of that too I
shall not long have cause to complaine. The greatest nuse I can
send from hence is, that this day my Lo. of Arundel is com~itted
to the Tower by the Upper House of Parlement for refusing to
make a submission to the House, and give satisfaction according
to the order of the House, for som reprochefull speaches he had
ther used to my Lo. Spencer; in which, nor his refusal to make a
fitting reparacion, he hath not played the part of so wise a man
as for his noble Ladie'st sake I wish he had. Sir Robert
Chichester's scurvie dealing
<P 79>
hath broken up the match betwixt his daughter and my Lo. of
Arran, which drives me to play my game another way than I had
layed my cards, and will hold me a Londoner till the ende of the
next terme; before which you shall hear from me againe; and I am
not unmindful of what any way I owe you, which is more than can
be requited by your trewly loveing friend,
   L. Bedford.
   Doe me the favor to reco~mend me affectionatly to M=r= Bacon,
and thanke him for his kind remembering me. Sir Thomas Fraser,
our oulde fellow, is eyther dead, or cannot passe this night, of
an imposthume, the fisicians conclude, in the mesentery.
Harington House, this 17th of May [\1621\] .
   To my Worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1622 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 79>
[} [\LIII. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Deere Sister,
   Not aboue 3 dayes beefore I receued yors by this poste, I
spent sow tyme in pervsinge sertaine letters of myne longe sence
receued from my good freind, & amongst others I founde som 100
of yo=rs= that were rytten beinge a maide, a
<P 80>
wyfe, & a widdowe. Theise letters cost mee an afternounes worke
to reede them over, & it did much comfort mee to finde by those
lines that I wounce had a sister whose loue & affection in those
dayes was nott to bee eaqualysed, & was glad to thincke w=th= my
selfe that I had not as yett one my parte giuen any cause to the
contrary. In regarde that yo=u= retourned noe answer of my
lettes by Salman, whom I imployed in England, I made my
reckoninge that you (had) tacken your leaue of wryghttinge, and
seeing the retourne of the ordinary courryer to com lickwise
vaquant, it confermed my fyrst oppinyon and made it the
stronger; but sence I perseve by yo=r= last that it was onely
want of commoditye & nothinge else that was the cause, yf it
shoulde soe faule out that my occations this winter shoulde 
cale me in to England, I dooe imagen that yo=u= wille thincke it
noe dishonnor to yo=u= to see mee com in good equypage. This
last sommer yo=u= were neere beeinge quitt of a brother, but it
hath pleased God, contrary to my one expectation, to restore
mee. Thus, w=th= my loue to yo=r= selfe and those of yo=rs=, I
rest
   Yo=r= trew affectionate 
   T. Meautys.
Arnheim, November the 7, 1622.

<Q COR 1623 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 81>
[} [\LIV. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
   Deeare Madam, - The constancies of my feares do enuite me
continually, as occasion is offered, to a desier for the
understanding of yo=e= estate, especially in these extremityes,
of w=ch= I do fynde my self very sensible, & next for my most
honored friend the L. of Bedford, vnto whom my prayers do dayly
entreat a talent of patience, equall or exceedinge her worst
fortunes. I am already very weary of vncertayntyes, w=ch= maketh
me hartely wish for a determined tyme of yo=e= cominge downe,
the delay of w=ch= hath made me feele the inconuenience. My
moother saluteth you, & desireth the entertaynement of this
token of her loue. My father hath recouered his hearinge, & much
longeth for yo=e= presence. The newes of my elder brother's
beinge aliue, w=ch= was long since traueled, hath bin approued
by iij or iiij merchants w=th= so great probabilityes that it
must necessarily be he or his counterfeit; the tyme since his
departure, his years, hayer, complexion, stature, qualletyes, &
many perticular circumstances concerninge his friends,
justifyinge yt w=th= such assurances that my father is
determyned
<P 82>
mediately to send a man onto him. If my conuersation her may
perceiue more then yo=e= imagination, be perswaded that yo=e=
retourne is uery necessary; vntill when I leave you w=th= my L.
of Bedford, attended by my best loue and seruise, and do rest
constantly yours,
   Nath. Bacon.
Culford, March 14, 1622-3.
   To the much honored lady the Lady Jane Cornwalleys, giue
these.

<Q COR 1623 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 82>
[} [\LV. COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
   Dear Madam, - I think itt very long since I heard of you, and
therefore send this messenger to bring me word how you doe, from
whom I should not have binne so many months without hearing, but
that for this two last I have had so much ill health and paine
as made me for a good part of the tyme unable to wright, and
yett hath left me but a lame woeman. Better nuse I hope to
reseave of you and yours, which I pray for, and shall wellcom
with a great deale of gladness for this fatall yeare keepes me
in continual fears for those I love, which if I did not you
hartely, I wear more than unworthy to have a freind. M=r= Bacon,
I trust, hath by this tyme perfectly recovered his long sicknes,
which, both for his owne sake and the comfort of your lyfe, I
cannot but with much
<P 83>
affection inquier after, and do so to know when you intend to
bee att London; where or hear I hope wee shall meete this spring
att the fardest, if the towne and these parts continue so cleane
from the sicknes as, God be thanked, att the present they are;
though all the markett townes about us, and many small villages,
Richmondsworth exsepted, have all this summer continued infected
as well as the citie, which kept me from sending to those I
hoped wear farder from danger for feare of convaighing any to
them, though God of his great goodnes spared my owne familie,
and hath yett reserved me, I hope, for his servis: if itt may be
also to doe you any, I assure you I shall love my lyfe the
better, and be much the more your contented, that am
   Y=r= most affectionat servant and faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
More Lodge, this 16th of January [\1622-3\] .
   To my noble & worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis, att Broome.

<Q COR 1623? NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 83>
[} [\LVI. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Hart,
   Hauinge this opportunitie by M=r= Chittock, I thought these
my letters myght come to yo=e= hands before yo=e= retourne,
being assured you would be very glad to heare of o=e= estate
here in the contry. For my self, therfore, you may vnderstand
that I
<P 84>
am reasonably well, but cannot quite my self of my distempers,
although they be very small. Vppon Tuesday last also, in the
night, I voyded some bloud to the quantitye of 5 or 6 dropps,
but yt stopt agayne imediately, & so hath contineued euer since.
I am now at Redgraue, wher I haue bin (ij nights excepted) euer
since my retourne, & wher I begin to grow very restless; for,
the discourse being long since spent, continuall repetitions
proue so tedious vnto me that some tyme I am so unmannerly as
not to geue audience. O=e= childeren ar well; & little Nick hath
cast his cote, and seemeth metamorphosed into a grasshopper.
Jane is a very modest mayden, & is wholely taken vpp w=th=
trauailinge by her self, w=ch= she perfourmeth very hansomely, &
wil be ready to runn at yo=e= comand when you retourne. Thus
w=th= my best love & prayers I leaue, resting alwaies & onely
   Yo=es= Nath. Bacon.
[\1622-3.\]
   To his best respected friend the Lady Cornewalleys, at her
lodginge ouer agaynst York Howse, at the signe of the Stirrop.

<Q COR 1623 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 84>
[} [\LVII. COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
   Deare Cornewallis, - I am sorry M=r= Bacon and you are so
punctual observers of the comandement
<P 85>
empties this towne, which itt is now too late, in regard of the
state you are in, to tell you, that if I had thought that had
binne any stay to your being a Londoner this winter, I wolde.
have donne you the servis to have gotten you a dispensation;
whos companie I should have binne extream glad to have had hear,
whear I shall be for the most part till the spring: and though
in this I am a greate looser, yett itt trobles me more to hear
how aprehensive you are of a danger itt hath pleased God to
carry you so often safely through, and so I doubt not will
againe, though you may do yourselfe and yours much harme, by
those doubtings and ill companions for all persons, and worst
for us splenetick creatures. Therfore, dear Cornewallis, lett
not this melancholy prevale with you to the begetting or
nourishing of those mistrusts will turne more to your hurt than
that you feare, which I hope will passe with safety and end to
your comfort, unto which if I could tell how hear or thear to
advise any thing, I wold affectionatly endeavour att in absence,
and readily undertake a longer jorney to you than itt is to
Broome; for though I have long suffered under a condicion hath
maimed me of all means in real effects to express itt, and hath
almost made me
<P 86>
hate fruitles professions, yett ther is no freind more sensible
of what they owe to another, nor fuller of earnest desiers to
deserve well of them, than my hart can wittnes I am towards you,
to whom I am not in so much despayre of making itt appear as I
have binne, nor, I hope; are you lesse confident that itt is an
unfained truth, that I am, 
   Yo=r= most affectionatly faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
Harington House, this 28 of November [\1623\] .
   I will write you no newse, for that I leave to M=r= Bacon,
who may hear in the towne very near as much as I know, since
what is like a secret passeth underneath, and so sounds not so
farre as this end of the towne, only I will give you my
testimony that the Prince is the most improved man that ever I
saw, and that my Lo. of Buckingham recovers much of what he had
lost, so as you may see that the only Wyse, who brings light out
of darknes, can favour us by ways we could not imagine could
have produced such happy effects. The litle juel you sent me is
a tresure, being the finest and best that I thinks was ever of
her kind, for which since I cannot thanke you enuffe, I will use
no words to thanke you for at all.
   To my noble and worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1624 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 87>
[} [\LVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^LUCY COUNTESS OF
BEDFORD TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Madam,
   I have binne hindered from sending to you as I purposed,
first for want of a footeman, and sinse by the sadde accident of
my Lo. of Richmond's death, which tied me to give my tyme to the
performance of the charitable offices I could to his La. Now I
send with a great deale of earnest longing for the retorne of
this bearer, because by your brother I hear you have binne ill
since your being delivered; but I truste itt is no other then
som indisposition incident to childe bed, and that I shall hear
you have recovered better health, which I wish as hartely att
the leaste as the continuance of my owne. Howsoever, since the
very season of the yeare invites you to itt, lett mee perswade
you as soone as you are able to comme to London, wheare the best
meanes are for the recovery or confirmacion of your health. You
know your olde lodgeings, which, or as convenient a one if I
keepe you out of that, shall be ready for you, and I infinitely
gladde of your companie and M=r= Bacon's. I never so much longed
to speake with
<P 88>
you, and to have you out of that solitarie place, wheare I heare
melancholie getts two much ground of you, which is so dangerous
an enemie as I extreamlie desier to have you so neare me as I
might offer you my best assistance and servis to overcom itt in
yourself, and remove the causes if itt be possible. Therefore
againe I pray you to resolve to chandge place for a while; som
divertisments att the leaste you will finde heare, from whence I
shall not, I thinke, remove till after Midsommer terme. Som
acount of what passeth hear, to entertaine you, I will make unto
you. First, my La. of Richmond's losse, though it weare such a
blow from Heaven as I must confesse I never knew given, will not
kille her, of so strandge resisting stue are our hartes made.
She was the happiest woman I thinke that lived, for by her owne
confession she acknowledged, that if she should have sitte doune
and studied what to aske of God for outward blessings and
inwarde comforts of this world more then she enjoyed, she could
find nothing to desier but a child; and it was true, for she had
of glorie and greatnes as much as a subject was capable of,
wealth of all kinds in abundance, health and extraordinary
beautie even at this adge, and, above all, a noble
<P 89>
husband, that was the love of her harte, and doted on her with
the same pasion to the last ower of his lyfe that he did the
first month of his being in love with her. Out of those loveing
armes she rose not two owers before he died, and left him, as
she thought, well, only troubled with a litle paine in his head,
which made him desirous to sleep a litle longer; which and his
death was so quiet, as his man sitting close to his bedside knew
not when he departed, but fearing, because itt was the day
apointed for the parliment, that he might wake too late, called
in a gentleman of his chamber that used to wake him, who drawing
the curtain found him starke dead. I lay by chaunce that night
att the Cockepitte, whither instantly this nuse was brought me,
and I presently went to the Duches, in whos lodgeings was to be
seen all that an unexpected calamity could show of sorrow. I 
much feared the first violence might have distracted her, but
her pasion had so liberal vent as I thinke itt wrought the less
inwardly. Her haire, in discharge of a vowe she had formerly
made, she cutte of close by the rootes that afternoone, and told
us of som other vowes of retirednes she had made if she should
be so miserable as to outlive him, which I hope she will as
punctually performe. For my part, I confesse I incouradge her to
itt, which, som say, hereafter she will love me nothing the
better for; but itt is the counsel I should take to myselfe in
her case, and 
<P 90>
therfore I cannot spare to give itt. She offers to deall very
nobly with my Lo. of Lenox, yett I imagine ther will grow
differences betwixt them out of his Lady's over greediness, for
they already refuse to accept condisions they had subscribed to,
though, if she have not very harsh and unusual measure offered
her, itt is in her choise wheather to part with any thing to
them or no. My Lo. of Buckingham hath made his declaracion to
the parlement, who yett aplaude itt because itt tends to the
final breach of the match with Spaine. The Houses have sitt so
short a tyme as what they do is not yett to be judged, but I
trust things will succeed well both for the Church and the
Commonwealth. The Lord Marquis Hamilton is Lord Steward, so as
that staffe hath had the good fortune to passe from a noble to a
worthie hand, wheare I hope itt will long remaine. But I fear
I do ill to wearie you with so many lines; therfore, deare
Cornewallis, I will not for the present say more then that I
love you as your owne meritt and the obligacions I owe you
justly deserves, and will never be wanting to you in any trial
you may have cause to make of
   Y=r= most affectionat and faithful freind,
   L. Bedford.
<P 91>
   Wee have much hope that the Prince will show himselfe of such
a temper as will be his owne glorie and the good of these
kingdoms.
   My Lord Steward hath taken from me your olde servant Jeames
Henly, and George Purser, whom he should not have had, if they
had not binne such as but for his sake I should very unwillingly
have parted with. Com~ende me, sweet Cornewallis, very kindly to
M=r= Bacon; and to my freind Fredericke, whom and the rest of
yours I beseech God to blesse.
   Harington House, this 28 of February [\1623-4\] .

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 91>
[} [\LIX. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Hart, 
   I do long much to heare how you do, w=th= little Jane;
wherfore I haue sent this messenger, by whom I desier to receiue
an answer. Vppon Weddensday last my Lo. Marshall was here at
Bury, onely to see me I thinck, for this place was out of his
way to Thetford, whither he went: he would haue come vnto me to
M=r= Pead's, but I preuented him by attendinge him at his inn,
wher he was pleased to fauor me beyond my expectation. All the
afternoone I waited vppon him about the ruines of the Abby. I
presented him w=th= yo=e= casket; w=ch=, in respect yt was
yo=rs=,
I could hardly fasten vppon 
<P 92>
him, had not M=r= Short wittenessed that yt was before sett
apart for him. I exercised more yesterday by walking than I haue
these 4 monethes, & I haue very well endured yt (God be
thancked), being at this tyme euery way better & better. If the
childe be very sick, I pray do not hasten yo=e= cominge hither,
for yo=e= presence may better be spared her than ther. I com~end
my best loue vnto you, w=th= my continuall prayers for you &
yo=rs= and rest,
   Yo=e= most affectionate,
   Nath. Bacon.
[\Bury, 1624.\] 
   To his best friend the La. Cornewalleys, at Broome, geue
these.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 92>
[} [\LX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^] 
Sweet Harte,
   By the first ocasion I am desirous to com~end vnto you the
good health of o=e= childeren, w=th= my self, who longingely
doth expect to heare of yo=e= safe arriuall at London w=th= some
happy progress of o=e= troublesome business. My brother Coleby
is to come vpp this next weeke, beinge yesterday arrested at
S=r= Henry Felton's sute, who I am sure
<P 93>
wilbe ready to do you any seruise if he shalbe at London in
tyme. You may heare of him in the Middle Row in Holeborne, at a
shoomaker's. Payne hath retowrned from London, & brought you a
letter from yo=e= brother Dormer; w=ch= I haue not sent you,
because he himself, w=th= his wife, lieth in London, wher you
shall se him. Instead of newes, (wherof this country affordeth
non,) accept the remembrance of my old loue, w=ch= shall neuer
be estranger vnto you, & w=th= w=ch= I do at this tyme so much
labour that I hope I shall make some good vse of this vacancie
in my meditations for some better manifestation of yt; w=th= my
earnest desiers to be wholely
   Yo=rs=, Nath. Bacon.
May 6 [\1624\] .
   To his moste noble friend the Lady Cornewalleys, at Harington
Howse, geue these. Leaue this w=th= M=r= James Henly, at
Harington Howse, to be delieuered.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 93>
[} [\LXI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^] 
Sweet Hart,
   I haue now receiued yo=e= letters w=th= much sattisfaction to
my desiers, by vnderstandinge of yo=e= health & safe ariuall at
London after so troublesome a journey; & do retourne vnto the
healthfull estate of o=e= childeren & my self, who haue since
yo=e= departure (thancks be to God) suffered very little in my
brest. I do wonder much that the
<P 94>
com~ission was not retourned in the prescribed tyme, since I my
self beinge at Norwich w=th= M=r= Morse did so much vrge yt to
M=r= Sherwood, who promised to retourne yt w=th=out fayle;
neyther haue I hearde any thinge of yt since yo=e= departure,
being not able to com~end any thing concerninge that business
but my many wishes for yo=e= frutefull endeauors in the
proceeding. My father her hath taken me so wholy vpp to his
seruise, hauinge at this tyme 50 men at worke in castinge his
great pond, that I can hardly haue tyme to look home, being my
self also studious to obserue him w=th= my best wits for the
better effecting of myne & yo=e= desiers. You shall receiue by
this bearer yo=e= wastecote, hauinge receiued yt this day from
Broome w=th= the health of o=e= childeren. I could gladly
vnderstande some tyme for the expectation of yo=e= retourne,
but I do expect uncertayntye in yt from the vncertaynety of o=e=
business; being assured that w=th= its licence ou=r= mutuall
loues shall receiue quickly ther mutuall desiers in each other's
presence. In the meane tyme I leaue yt, w=th= my self, wholely
to yo=e= disposing; and you=e= self attended w=th= the best
prayers of him who wilbe alwaies Yo=e= Nath. Bacon.
   I pray speak to John Fenn to buy me 3 ownces of masticott
more than I wrote for, & it need not be of the best sort, yt
being for yo=e= seate, w=ch= was
<P 95>
sett vpp the last Satterday. We haue payed a subsidie & halfe to
the beneuolence. My seruice to all w=th= you.
Culford, May 15 [\1624\] .
   To his moste worthy friend the Lady Cornewalleys, at the Lady
Cooke's howse by Charing Cross, geue these.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 95>
[} [\LXII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^] 
Sweet Hart,
   The tyme since yo=e= departure seemeth longe, & my desiers
for yo=e= company maketh me desier also you=e= resolution for a
retourne. I know not the second success of o=e= business, but I
am fully persuaded that it is no less troublesome to you than
the former, w=ch= maketh me still wish that yo=e= patience may
so digest yt that yt may prevent any inconvenience w=ch= eyther
body or mynde may from thence suffer, & wherin I should be much
satisfied if I might vnderstand of any content intermixt w=th=
this yo=e= trouble. News o=r= country affordeth none but this,
that we both are presented by the churchwardens at this last
visitation, the Archdeacon being present, urging yt, for not
keepinge o=e= church in the after noone. My neece Nann Gawdy
also is, I thinck, certayne of a husband, w=ch= is M=r=
Stanhope. Myself with o=e= children ar in perfect
<P 96>
health at this present. I haue not yett receued any letter from
you this week by reason of my beinge now at Broome, wherefore I
cannot by this make any particular answer, onely I commend, by
any occasion offered, my harty prayers for yo=e= health w=th=
Fred's, & desier alwaies the contineuance of yo=e= favorable
affection to him, who, although weak in desert yet stronge in
hart, shall ever be onely, You=rs=, Nath. Bacon.
[\1624.\]
   I pray lett Johnsen have this thred inclosed, w=ch= is the
length of my pistolls, whereby he may gett y` cases for them;
the pistolls ar of the biggness of breach pistols.
   To his moste worthy friend the Lady Cornewalleys, at the Lady
Cooke's house by Charing Cross, London.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 96>
[} [\LXIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^] 
Myne owne Sweet Hart,
   I belieue this tyme (affording for the moste part diuersity
of messengers) hath fayled yo=e= expectation in hearing oftener
from me, w=ch= I do assure you hath not bin my fault, I hauinge
bin continually inquisitiue this last week for a priuate
messenger, wherin I fayled; & now w=th= the first, I do com~end
vnto you the good estate of o=e= childeren, w=th= some
betteringe of myne owne, as also of
<P 97>
my sister Waldegraue's, whose best loue, w=th= my sister
Drurye's, do attend you. I am sorry to heare of yo=e= head ach,
for w=ch= I belieue S=r= Charles Cornewalleys will proue no good
phisitian. My brother Nick was maryed vppon Satterday last to
M=rs= Darcey; & for contry newes, you may vnderstand, if you
haue not already, that for certayne the States of Holland wer,
the last Sunday was a seuennight, w=th= the King, wher, takinge
occasion
<P 98>
from the estate of the Pallatines, they offered ther seruise to
the K. agaynst the K. of Spayne, who moste graciously receiued
them, & acknoweledged vnto them the affront done by the K. of
Spayne, but differed any conclusion vntill the retourne of M=r=
Porter; in the meane tyme assured them of the continuation of a
moste firme league duringe his lyfe, & hath honored many w=th=
knightwod, & some other of the cheifest ar to receiue yt by
pattent for them & ther posterity. I haue sent you her inclosed
a bill of exchange, by w=ch= you may receiue o=e= mony due from
my father. Thus, w=th= my best wishes for good success in yo=e=
troublesome business, & my prayers for the recouery &
continuance of yo=e= health, I leaue you. I pray, retourne my
best service to my cosin Glouer & his wife & the rest of my
friends, & rest alwaies yo=er= 
   Nath. Bacon.
[\1624.\]
   To his moste noble friend the Lady Cornewalleys, at London

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 98>
[} [\LXIV. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^] 
Sweet Hart,
   I receiued yo=e= letter, wherby I vnderstand of the slow
proceeding of o=e= business; &, for myne
<P 99>
owne part her, I cannot be so well pleased but I much desier
dayly to be w=th= you, wherfore I desier you to send me word by
the next whether my cominge may be inconuenient or not, & how
longe you meane to stay. For my cominge, I cannot wright any
thinge certayne; for my horses ar infected w=th= other sick
horses, & so extreamely sick that I know not whether they will
liue or not. For my health, I cannot wright as I did last; for
this last week I suffered more payne in my teeth then euer, &
this night I slept not one hower, & am now goinge to the
mountebanck at Bury to draw them out. For y=e= childeren, they
ar in very good health. Nick sends you word of a brood of young
chickens, & of a disaster he escaped at my beinge w=th= him; for
he eate so much milk porrage at supper that he cryed out, (O
Lord!) I think I haue almost broake myne guutt; & I was fayne to
walk him a turne or ij about the chamber to digest yt.
   Newes I cann wright none; wherfore I desier you onely to
entertayne my earnest desiers to enioy you=e= company, then
w=ch= nothing can be more pleasing to him who is & shall be
allwaies onely 
   You=rs=, Nath. Bacon.
[\1624.\]
   To his moste noble friend the Lady Jane Cornewalleys, at
Haringeton Howse, geue these.

<Q COR 1624 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 100>
[} [\LXV. COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Dear Madam,
   I sent to Wight Halle presently after you went from hence on
Friday, but my La. of Lenox was not retorned from Litleton, so
as I could not gett her second letter to the Keeper, but I hope
I shall hear her first had the effect you desired. If more you
wold have done by her on Tuesday, when the K. is gone from
Grenwidge, I will find her out and bring you what you desier of
her. Therfore lett me know how your busnes hath gonne, and what
furder servis may be donne you by your La=ps= loveing freind, 
L. Bedford.
   This is like to proove as busy a weeke with me, as, if I see
you not hear, I doubt I shall not at that ende of the towne.
Harington House, this 23d of June [\1624\] .
   To my worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 100>
[} [\LXVI. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Hart,
   For the business, although the success hath not yett
sattisfied my desiers, yet it hath so far
<P 101>
equalled my expectation that I cannot but be fully perswaded of
your moste great care & dilligence, wherby it hath attayned this
present estate. For your retourne, myne owne disposition
teacheth me to be best pleased with your best sattisfaction;
yet, in these my desiers, the end of your last letter maketh me
to crave a favorable construction. Little newes I can wright;
only the marriage of my neece Gawdy, & the death of Pearse &
Franck Woodhowse.
   My self with the children ar in perfect health, God be
thancked; the which I shall dayly wish a pray to you & Fred,
with my best endevors to be so much my self, that I may fully
perswade you that my greatest happiness shall alwaies consist in
being Your Nath. Bacon.
[\1624.\]
   To his noble friend Lady Cornewallis.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 101>
[} [\LXVII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   In some haste & fewe words I do retourne you many thanckes
for yo=e= letter receiued by M=r= Baylife, together w=th= the
newes, but especially for the
<P 102>
abundance of yo=e= loue therin professed; w=ch= I desier you to
beleue is so wellcome vnto me that the meditation therof must be
vnto me my cheifest comfort in this yo=e= absence, & that my
best endeuors shall allwaies ayme at some meanes to my pore
power both to requite & deserue yt. O=e= childeren w=th my self
ar in health (God be thancked), w=th= the rest of yo=e= friends.
I wish you good success w=th= yo=e= business, & in the meane
tyme content both w=th= the place & proceedinges. Excuse my
shortness, beinge com~anded by the day & tyme; & entertayne the
best prayers of him who is alwaies 
   Yo=es=,
   Nath. Bacon.
Thrandeston, May 19 [\1624\] .
   M=r= Parr, M=rs= Parr, & M=r= Greenhill remember ther best
seruise. My seruise to all my friends, & bid Jhon Fenn to send
my coullers so soone as possible.
   To his most worthy friend the Lady Cornewalleys, at the Lady
Cooke's howse by Charinge Cross, geue these, London.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 102>
[} [\LXVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Harte,
   I am very sorry that you haue suffered so much in yo=e=
health since yo=e= comminge to London; w=ch= 
<P 103>
beinge joyned w=th= yo=e= troublesome business cannot, I am
certayne, but make this journy uery tedious vnto you. For S=r=
Charles Cornwalleys, I am glad that the justness of o=e= case
hathe appeared, and should be glad to understand of some remedy;
although from him yt is hardly to be exspected, he remayninge
moste constant (as yt seemeth) in his fraudulent courses. O=e=
children wer well in health uppon Moonday last, when I saw them.
Nic hath been troubled with illness, but perfectly recouered,
thankes be to God. I was desirous to haue seen you for a day at
London, the journy being not much from Cambridge, wher I now am;
but the extremity of the weather hath so disfauoured me that I
cannot neyther with conueniency nor security, attempt yt, being
altogether unprouided for these uery fowle waies: wherfore I
desire you to excuse me, and to entertayne these few lynes, by
w=ch= moste affectionately I do com~end my best prayers and
wishes for yo=e= perfect health, content, and safe retourne,
wherin I shall more joy than in any other earthly blessinge, and
w=th= my best power endeauour onely
   Yo=e=
   Nath. Bacon.
   From Cambridge, wher I haue bin by M=r= Greenhill moste well
entertayned. June 3 [\1624\] .
   To his moste noble friend the Lady Cornwalley's at the Lady
Cooke's howse by Charinge Cross, geue these

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 104>
[} [\LXIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   I receiued yo=e= letter by Murdock, by w=ch= I vnderstand the
troublesome proceedinge of o=e= business, for w=ch= I am sorry,
but especially; for the tediousness that you ar affected w=th=
by reason of the trouble in yt & you longe stay by yt; &
although I am euery hower in expectation of yo=e= presence, yet
I could not but venter the arrivall of these lynes before yo=e=
departure, by w=ch= you may vnderstand of the perfect health of
myself & o=e= children & the rest of yo=e= friends her, & the
sweet estate of yo=e= howse & gardin, w=ch= to the best endeuors
of my self & yo=e= seruants hath bin prepared to geue you a
pleasinge welcom, together w=th= 14 yonge fesants, w=ch=
peepinge do much desier ther M=rs= presence. Thus all of vs
rests in the hopes of yo=e= sodayne retourne, w=ch= by how much
the more desired by so much the more yo=e= welcome shall be
endeuored, but especially by him the perfection of whose
happynes resteth in yo=e= loue & the deseruing yt, and in beinge
   Oneley yo=rs=,
   Nath. Bacon.
Broome. June 5 [\1624\] .
   To his noble friend the Lady Cornewalleys, at the Lady
Cooke's howse by Charing Cross, geue these.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 105>
[} [\LXX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   I haue long expected to heare from you of yo=e= health, but
haue not yett receiued any thing since my departure. I would be
loth to omitt any occasion, w=ch= maketh me venture this letter;
otherwise being almost perswaded of yo=e= retourne before this
shall come to yo=e= hands: so howsoeuer, if you receiue yt, you
may vnderstand my health to be euery way equall w=th= that
before yo=e= going upp, if not better. O=e= childeren also ar
all in good health: Nick hath well recouered his ague; & M=rs=
Mop is a much fyner girle than euer, & more familliar w=th= me,
& I hope before strawberyes go out I shall win her hart for
euer. I haue no more to wright but my many prayers & wishes for
yo=e= health & happy retourne, w=ch= God grant vnto you. Thus,
w=th= my best loue & servise to yo=e= self w=th= the rest of my
friends, I leaue, resting onely
   Yo=es=, Nath. Bacon.
Redgraue, June 13 [\1624\] .
   To his best respected friend the La. Cornewalleys, at her
lodging oueragaynst York Howse, at the signe of the Stirrop,
geue these, London.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 106>
[} [\LXXI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   The tyme of expectinge yo=e= retourne, beinge hastened by
myne owne desiers, doth now approach: yett, not vnderstandinge
how yo=e= expectation for the proceedinge in yo=e= business hath
bin favored, I must reste still doubtfull of yo=e= presence her
vntill I shall heare fardher from you. This gentleman hath
brought me a letter from S=r= Thomas Meautys, the contents
wherof if you do not already vnderstand, I must conceale vntill
o=e= next meetinge; yt beinge nothinge necessary to com~end them
to you in wrighting at this tyme, I hauinge also desired this
messenger to excuse myne answer vntill Payne's retourne in to
the Low Countryes. Newes we haue none, onely the sodeyne
retourne of my brothers out of the Low Countryes before they cam
ther, ther voiage not exceeding Yarmouth. My perfect health,
w=th= o=e= children's, you may receiue by these, w=h= my dayly
prayers for yo=es=, & my moste earnest desiers that you may
entertayne the necessity of this distance of place w=th= the
vertu of beinge content; & that you will be merry, & remember me
once a day in a cup of clarrett, the pledg of w=ch= I shall in
conceipt retourne vnto you w=th= many thanckes. Com~end my loue
& servise to my friends, & be
<P 107>
assured that I shall not be more happy in any thing than in the
manifestation of the moste secrett sincerity of my hart, whereby
I cannot appeare other to you then yo=e= onely
   Nath. Bacon.
Culford, this present Fryday [\1624\] .
   To his moste worthy friend the Lady Cornewalleys, att the
Lady Cooke's howse by Charing Cross, geue these.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 107>
[} [\LXXII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   W=th= my many desiers to salute you by all occasions offered,
I do com~end these lines w=th= my present health, w=ch= at this
my beinge in London hath bin moste constant, thancks be to God.
I haue bin w=th= yo=e= kynsman, M=r= Thom Meautys, and he tould
me that S=r= Thomas Meautys determined to be in England 10 dayes
after the wrightinge of his letter, w=ch= he receiued by Payne,
since w=ch= tyme he hath not heard of him. I spake also w=th=
him concerning the Sherifes, and he tould me that the last yeare
the Kinge himself disliked much the pricckinge of those whose
names wer not geuen in vnto him, & that he would warrant me
free, vnless my name wer geuen in to him by the L. Keepere,
w=ch= I cannot yett know; howsoeuer, I perceiue great meanes
made of all hands, & I shall endeuor the best I can for myself.
For newes her is
<P 108>
very little, but some hopes that the stronge report of the kinge
and princes death of Polonia may proue vntrue, for her hath
lately arriued a ship out of these contries, w=ch= relateth no
such thinge; & besides, the Spanish embassador hath no such
intelligence. The report is also of an embassador out of Spayne
for the Low Countryes, to treat of peace; for whose
entertaynement ther is ther great preparation. A confirmation
also of the sea fight betwixt the Frenche Kinge & the
Rocchellers, 6 of the Kinge's shipps being sunck, & iij taken; &
also of the other newes I last wrote, of another nauiie of
shipps is also preparinge, the intent vncertayne, some say for
Spayne, the match proceeding according to the comon report. For
my retourne, yt resteth onely vpon this business of the
Sherifes, otherwise yt should be imediate, beinge so fully
satisfied w=th= this place, that I do assure you yt is rather
tedious to me than plesant. The lady of Bedford is not yet come
to the towne, nor is expected vntill Wedensday next. No other
things I can com~end vnto you, but the best loue of him who must
alwaies be entirely
   Yo=e=, Nath. Bacon.
From the Raynebow, in bow lane, October 26 [1624].
   Tell Nan I haue bought her a fine new gowne, wherfore I shall
expect a great forwardness in her book at my retourne.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 109>
[} [\LXXIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   Not expectinge the retourne of the messenger, nor reckoning
of the opportunity of the carrier, I do com~end vnto you these,
wherby you may vnderstand of the safe arriuall & present health 
of o=e= childeren: for my self, I am still accompanyed w=th= my
constant companions, the tooth ach & head ach, of whose society
I begin to grow so weary that I shall not any longer geue them
quiet entertaynement, but vnwillingely call in the ayde of the
phisitian. I longingely desier to hear the end of yo=e=
troublesome journy, w=th= yo=e= present estate; vppon w=ch= my
best wishes haue attended, & w=ch= I do expect to vnderstand
very shortly by Cock. Newes the contry affordeth small: onely my
nephew Bass. Gawdy, I vnderstand, is come ouer & hath sould his
cullars; I vnderstand also that Ensigne Rosseter was slayne at
Berghen. My sister Waldegraue remayneth in her former estate,
whose best loue, w=th= my sister Drurye's, doth attend you.
Thus, w=th= my many desiers for yo=e= 
<P 110>
cheerfull patience in yo=e= troublesom business, & my continuall
prayers for yo=e= health & good success in them, I leaue you to
God's protection, resting happy in any occasion wherby I may
express my desiers to be 
   Onely yo=es=,
   Nath. Bacon.
Culford, Nouembre 20 [\1624\] .
   I pray remember my loue & seruisse to all my friends.
   To his moste noble freind the Lady Jane Cornewalleys, geue
these.

<Q COR 1624 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 110>
[} [\LXXIV. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Deere Sister,
   Yo=rs= by my cosen Meautys beeinge com to my hands, I woulde
not lett this carryer goe w=th=out theise, w=ch= must retourne
yo=u= thancks for yo=rs=, that I shall eauer thincke myselfe
moste happye yf I maye any daye dooe yo=u= servis to requite the
affection you beare mee; and longer then reciperecoly I maye
answere yo=rs= I shall not desier to bee happye, neather in this
worlde nor in the worlde to come. I vnderstand that my brother
is suddenly well recouered and beeyounde expectation, the w=ch=
I dooe ingenyously confes that I am glad of; and soe, I praye,
remember my loue to him. I did receue letters from Coventrye,
but none from my
<P 111>
mother, for I am informed that shee is very ill sence yo=r=
goinge from London. Shee sent mee a letter, w=ch= I shoulde a
sent vnto yo=u= but it had gotten a myschance by the waye,
haueinge bin, as it shoulde seame, bin lett fall in the durt,
and was holely vnfitt to bee sent. I haue informed hir of it,
that shee maye right againe. Thus, w=th= the trew affection of a
lovinge brother, I rest allwayes reddy to macke good my
oblygatyon till the tyme come that I shall bee called awaye to
render an account of the sencerytye of my hart w=ch= I own
towards you beefore Him that is the judger of all men's harts;
till then I am 
   Yo=r= moste affec=t= brother & servant,
   T. Meautys. 
London, Desember the 23, 1624.
   To my deere Sister the Lady Jane Cornewallyes, for the
present att M=r= Peade's howse in Berry, giue these.

<Q COR 1624 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 111>
[} [\LXXV. COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO MR. BACON.\] }] 
S=r=.
   I see your freinds had need be moderat in ther requests to
you, that have so liberal a hand in the satisfieinge them; for
my part, I must give you the discouragement to say you have
gotten nothing by your care so plentifully to furnishe me with
what I
<P 112>
desired, but a bare acknowledgement of my thankfullness; since
my desier to deserve well of you, and sence of the obligations I
ought you, wear att that height before, as they can reseave no
increase: yett this do we the right to believe, that though
this must stand at a stay, my endevors shall not do so, if ever
they may find such employment as may witnesse me to be in deed
as well as in words, Sir, the thankefullest and most assured of
your freinds, L. Bedford.
Bedford House, in haste, this 6th of November [\1624\] .
   When you come next to town we shall be able to shew you some
good new pieses of painting at Harington House.
   To my much esteemed freind M=r= Bacon, att Broome.

<Q COR 1624 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 112>
[} [\LXXVI. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Hart,
   I am very glad to vnderstand of yo=e= safe though troublesome
arriuall at London, as allso of the recovering estate of yo=e=
sister so much contrary to yo=e= expectation, and I pray God
continew yt. Since yo=e= departure yt was reported at Bury so
confidently that yt was Sir Thomas Meautys that was sick, and
not yo=e= sister, as I had almost belieued
<P 113>
yt before I receiued yo=e= letter reportinge the contrary. O=r=
children ar all well, God be thanked, with my self, who haue bin
these ij last passed dayes verry well and much better than when
you left me or better than I haue bin these 14 dayes. I haue
vsed garlick agayne w=th= much benifite. The Lady Jermine hath
entertayned yo=e= bitch w=th= all thanckfullness. I haue cast
vpp superficially the inuentory of all the stock and mouables of
Culford w=th= the legacies to be payed out, the plate xcepted,
and yt amounteth vnto 1200,40 and odd pounds. My brother Coleby
hath offered to buy the stock of kyne and horses and to hyre so
much ground as now resteth in myne owne hands, but I have
differed my resolution.
   Thus leaving you w=th= my best loue, wishes and prayers, I
rest, being alwaies
   Onely yo=rs=, Nath. Bacon.
Culford, this Sunday [\Dec=r= 1624\] .
   My loue and servis I pray to all my friends. Sweet Hart, geue
order to M=r= Morse I pray for the payment of 20 marks to M=r=
Chitting, the fee due to the Herralds upon my father's death.

<Q COR 1625 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 114>
[} [\LXXVII. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Dear Sister,
   This is only to lett you understand that, since I hear that
my sister of Sussex is nott quickly to part with her greate
belly as yett, I doe pourpose, God willinge, upon the retourne
of this messenjer, to goe downe to Coventry, &, before my
cominge back, to marry with the eldest daughter of Sir Richard
Burneby. The reasons that endeuceth mee to it is bee cause I am
assured that a good foundation will all ways stand, and by that
meanes I am in hope to preserve the name in my father's lyne,
the which I doe much desire, with God's favorable assystance.
Her portyon is but +L1500, which is not much; yett, when I
consider the breadinge, discretyon, and disposityon of the
jentle woman, and havinge likewise made a calculatyon of my own
means and abyllytyes, I must confes that shee is rich in
comparrason of my selfe. My sister of Sussex hath, with the
consent of my Lorde, afforded mee +L200 a years annujty, to mee
and my ayers for eaver, in present, the which I will assure to
my wyfe for a parte of her joynture, and as much more as I can
inrich her with. Now, if it shall please you to sett to your
helpinge hand
<P 115>
for to sett us up, or to be a means to preserve us from fallinge
in regarde that our estats will not bee grate, you shall binde
her as much as myselfe all ways to dooe you servis, and wee will
acknolidg it with all thankfullness, and valleu you as one of
our best benefactuers. In regard of my long staye out of the Low
Countryes, monye is grown short with me at this present; if it
will please you to think upon mee in regarde of my occasyon, and
use it att this tyme, you shall much favour mee. This, with my
love to you & all yours first.
   Your moste affectionate brother & servant,
   T. Meautys.
Jan. the 6, 1624-5.
   To my dear the Lady Cornewallys, at Brome or els where, give
these.

<Q COR 1625 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 115>
[} [\LXXVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^] 
Deere Sister,
   The sayme daye I receued yo=r= last by my footman I fell
extreame ill of a scouringe, w=ch= hath continued upon mee eauer
sence, but, I thanck God, it beegins somethinge to lessen it
selfe of it selfe, w=ch= was the cause yo=u= haue not herd from
mee till now; haueinge eauer sence kept my lodgeinge by reason
of a soreness in my throte, and 
<P 116>
horseness w=th=all, that did macke mee holely vnfitt for
company; yett, for all this, I durst not adventuere to put my
selfe in to the docktor's hands, but hath lett Nateure worcke
his wille w=th= mee, and I hope for the best. Yo=r= noble &
discreete proffer & presentation I must moste lovingly and
affectyonately imbrace; and w=th=all, retourning yo=u= the
thanckes I dare not saye due to yo=r= merrytt, but all that my
merrytt is capable to render you for soe worthy a respect of
yo=rs= to mee, for conclusyon, my wyfe that shall bee shall
remayne yo=r= servant and joythfull pentyoner; for I haue
constytuted the benevolence yo=u= haue bestowed upon mee to hir
present pertyceuler vseses and pryvate mayntenance, for the
w=ch= shee shall in pertyceuler hereafter retourne yo=u= hir
thanckes, w=th= as much loue to you from hir parte, beinge hir
sister, as shee can beare to my selfe, whome shee exspects to
haue to bee hir husband, or else shee cannot loue mee soe much
as shee professeth. And though all bee but thanckes w=ch= can
com from mee to you, yett lett mee macke that apeere as much as
I can in all, w=ch= is to shew my gratitude to you for yo=r=
present asistance allsoe, w=ch= I haue receued, as yo=r=
dyrectyons was. I praye God contynue me gratefull to you, w=ch=
yf I shoulde fayle in shewen, I shoulde drawe a punyshment upon
my one hed, beecause I have the contrary in another. For newes,
S=r= Joh. Radclyfe is deade, and his
<P 117>
sonne hath his company; the Counte Mansfeldes bysnis goes not
forward as it aught; the French kinge hath refeused him landinge
and passage in France, soe that hee is now to shypp his troopes
for Hamborough. God speed them well, and send them good succkses
att there eand! As for ther beeginninge, it is but vntoward,
w=th= lyttle hope of good suckses. I pray remember my loue to my
brother and to all yo=r= lyttle ones. Att Clarekenwell, I
beelieue, they heere nothinge of my cosen Glover's goinge
towards yo=u=, whome, I thincke, will send you this. Soe, deere
sister, I rest,
   Yo=r= moste affecty=te= brother & servant,
   T. Meautys.
This 18=th= Jan=y= 1624-5.
   To yo=r= worthy selfe.

<Q COR 1625 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 117>
[} [\LXXIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^] 
My deere & worthy Sister,
   Yo=r= cordiall & lovinge letter I haue receued, but w=th=
some hazard, for I knowe not by whoes hands it was sent mee.
Y=r= lines are in all things licke yo=r= selfe, confortable &
loving. Now, deere sister, sence yo=u= haue bin pleased to send
my wyfe and mee soe many good wishes, w=th= a promyse that yo=u=
will in yo=r= meditatyons thincke upon vs, I will therefore now
tacke the boldness to desier
<P 118>
yo=u= to holde yo=r= word, for I dooe receue it as an artycule
of my beeleafe, & am confident, that wee shall prosper much the
better for yo=r= good prayers. My wyfe hath a longinge desier
for to see yo=u=, but wee knowe not how to compass it, my tyme
goeing soe fast upon mee to bee gon for the Low Countryes, soe
that shee is for this season allmoste out of hope; but myselfe
will wayght upon yo=u=, God willing, as soone as I can. I praye
lett my loue bee remembered to my brother Bacon, and to all my
prittie kindred; and receue these from yo=r= affect=y= brother,
that dooth moste loue & honor yo=u=, T. Meautys.
Coventry, the 17=th= of March 1624-5.
   To my much honored deere sister the Lady Cornewallis giue
these.

<Q COR 1625 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 118>
[} [\LXXX. COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Deare Madam,
   I acknowledge that I feele so to the quicke this last
afliction God hath pleased to lay upon me as no worldly comfort
will ever be able to prevaile against itt, for I have lost the
best and worthiest freind that ever breathed, whom I could not
love enoffe for what he was to me, nor sufficiently
<P 119>
admire for what he was in himselfe and to all the world; nor can
I ever by any sorrow satisfie my owne hart that itt is such as I
ought to have for such a heavie crosse, which yett I trust will
be a means to fitt me the sooner for heaven, because I am sure
nothing on earth will ever be able to recover much hold on me;
not that God hath not yett in mercie leaft me freinds I love
better then ever I did myselfe, but this hath made me see that I
must have the best freinds in the world but to loose them I know
not how soone, for he that was so sodainly taken from me, both
for his years, strength, health and temper, was like to have
lived to much greater adge than any I have left and so I think
would, had not his noble hart binne too great for thes tymes and
his fortunes in them. But he is, I doubt not, now wheare nothing
of felicity is grudged him, and hath left behind him more trewly
sorowfull harts of both nacions then any man's death now living
can make againe, and many of us yett know not how to indure one
another's sight, being deprived of his; for myselfe I must
trewly say I am a maimed body and worse, and so is my Lo.
Chamberlain, the last person left of power that I can relie on
for the worth of his affection and friendship to me; and, to
speake freely to you, the only honest harted man imployed that I
know now left to God and his countrie, in which I believe you
will hear 
<P 120>
of a great change before this letter comme to your hands, for I
heard this morning from Tibaults that the King was this morning
in so weake estate, as there was no hope of his lyfe, though
till his 3 last fitts there was no [{more{] doubt of his safety
then of every man's that hath an ordinarie tercian ague, so
fatal a yeare is this to great persons as well as meaner. The
Lo. therfore give us all grace not to delay preparing to be
ready whensoever He shall please to call us, and then the sooner
He takes us out of the misserable world the more cause we shall
have to magnifie his compacion. Deare Madam, retorn my thankes
and affectionat salutacions to your husband, and believe that,
though itt will be with a sadder hart, I shall ever continue to
love you as your kindnes hath from tyme to tyme given me cause,
which is all so unfortunat a woman as I am can deserve itt by;
but of that you shall never want any real proofe can be given by
   Yo=r= most affectionat and thankefull freind, 
   L. Bedford.
   I know I need not tell you that I take your kinde sending as
kindly as is posible, and that I thanke you more for itt then I
can sett downe. 
   More Lodge, this 23 of March 1624-5.

<Q COR 1624 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 121>
[} [\LXXXI. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\]
}]
Deare Cornewallis,
   The good nuse of M=r= Bacon's amendement was exceeding
wellcome to me, that have a lively sence of all that concerns
you, in whos discomforts I shall ever have a share, and so have
now of gladnes for the good signes of his recoverie, which lett
not your affection make you distrustfull of, when himselfe,
others, and you, too, find a betteringe of his health and
strength; for, when nature winnes upon the disease, itt is an
argument that the worst is past, though lingering sicknesses are
not shaked off att an instant, but commonly weare away by
degrees as they camme. Therfore have pacience, and afflict not
yourselfe; while God, I hope, intends you your hart's desier,
not to take from you yett that you hold so deare, who have
already learnt so well to submit your will to His, as so sharpe
a precept needes not to teach you obedience. But, howsoever the
only wise God shall please to deale with you, you shall have my
infirme prayers that He will never leave to speake peace unto
your soule, nor to give you joyefull
<P 122>
assurances of His favor, whearof, if it be His will, I beseech
Him now, as an earnest to hear what you aske for your husband;
to whom I praye you com~ende me very affectionatly, and tell
him, as I did you, that if itt please him to make trial of
chandge of ayr, or that remedy which hear grows daylie more and
more in request through the general good successe itt hath, I
desier, exsept you will be in London to have him that ministers
that, the oftener with him, that he will choose More Park to be
the place he will remoove unto, which I hope you both take for
one of your homes. But if you had rather be in towne under this
roofe, you may commande all I calle mine, which is not farre
neither from my cosin Kellway's house, who I dare undertake will
be carefull to doe you and M=r= Bacon all the servis he can. I
give you many thankes for the reseit, which with your last I
reseaved. For all your kindneses I can but love you, which I doe
and ever shall hartely while ther is breath in
   Your most affectionat and faithfull freind,
   L. Bedford.
Harington House, in haste, this Saterday morning [\1624\] .
   Since your goeing my Lo. of Kensington is comme out of
France, who brings word that they
<P 123>
are so desirous of that mache as I believe itt will presently be
both concluded, and she hear, eare long, upon less ill
condicions then Spaine insisted on for matter of religion. I
intend, God willing, within ten or twelve days at fardest, to be
fixed at More Park, from whence I will send to you. My Lo. of
Kensington retornes instantly againe into France.
   To my noble and worthy freind the Lady Cornewallis, att
Broome.

<Q COR 1625 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 123>
[} [\LXXXII. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
My deere & worthy Sister, 
   Soe seldome or neavor dooth the occatyon present it selfe
that any trustye messengers travells in to the parts where you
are, from that quarter about Coventrie where I now am, that I
must of nessessitye imploye one expres to inquyer of y=r= good
health, or else it weare impossible allmoste to partycypate of
the knowledg thereof; but att this tyme, haueing soe good an
occatyon offered mee by yo=r= worthy selfe in sending soe fayre
a toeken to my wyfe I must confes for vs booth that wee are
joyntly in payne vntill that shee & I haue retourned ower harty
& loving thanckes for yo=r= kinde remembrance of hir; & indeede,
my good sister, I aknoledg my selfe infynytly beeholding to
yo=u= for it, for yo=u= haue booth grased mee much & 
<P 124>
lickewyse honored mee by that favour, & I praye to God that I
maye but liue to deserve & to bee thanckfull vnto yo=u= for
yo=r= loving respect shewed vnto vs booth. I haue left yo=r=
sister to hir selfe for to bee thanckfull vnto yo=u= in hir one
selfe; but I dout it will not bee in many lynes, hir health
haveing bin none of the best of late, occationed by a disaster
gotten by ryding in hir coach, w=ch= did cause a grate pane in
hir back, w=ch= caused hir to keepe hir bed for three or foure
dayes; & the learned saye shee must tacke hir leaue of hir coach
for one month or too. It trobles hir not a lyttle, haueing, upon
the recepte of yo=r= laste to vs booth, perswaded w=th= mee that
shee myght come vp to London, onely to see yo=u= & haue the
happynes to bee acquainted w=th= you; but it weare to grate a
happyness booth for mee & hir to attayne to. I praye, deere
sister, let mee eauer be entertayned in yo=r= good oppinyon, for
I am, and will allwayes remayne,
   Yo=r= moste affect' brother and humble servant,
   T. Meautys.
   I praye lett mee bee kindly remembered vnto all my lyttle
cosens.
Coventry, Apryll the 7=th=, 1625.
   To my deere & much honored sister the Lady Jane Cornewallys
att Brome in Suffolcke, these.

<Q COR 1625 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 125>
[} [\LXXXIII. COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Dear Cornwalleis,
   I have written as effectually as I could to my Lo.
Chamberlains who I thinke, if it be in his power, will do what
you desier. What the King's resolucion is yett for his owne and
his father's servants, he hath not declared farder then the
whight staves, which are to remaine as they wear; but for the
greene cloth, and other inferior officers both of the household
and chamber, itt is thought he will imploye his owne and
dismisse his father's, because he hath caused the latter to be
all removed to Denmarke House to attende the body; and lodged
the former about himselfe att Whitehalle: and, for aught any
body yett can discover, he makes his owne determinacions and is
very stiff in them; having already changed the whole face of the
court very near to the same forme itt had in Queene Elizabeth's
tyme, suffering nonne but the counsell and his bedchamber to
come further than the privie chamber, whear he continually
abides; nor the councell to go furder than the privie galerie,
and causes itt to be strictly kept likewise. Into the presence
no more are admitted than his owne servants and gentlemen of
quality. Of his bedchamber he hath sworn nonne more than he had
<P 126>
before but the Duke of Buckingham, whom he uses very well; but,
it is hoped, will be governed by no man, nor will he admitt any
of the rest as is thought. After the funerall itt is expected
that he will make som alterations among the great officers, and,
the com~on voice is, change my Lord Chamberlain's staffe into
that I shall never but with sorrow see in other hand than that
that held itt last, and bestow his upon his brother. Yett so far
he hath not yett declared himself; but, if this be, I have taken
order that, if any power remane in the Chamberlaine for the
gentlemen ushers' places, whethersoever of them hold that
staffe, itt shall be alike for your request; and this I did
because I think the chamber will not be settled till the
principal officer be so. The King is pleased to use my Lord
Chamberlain that is as graciously as any man; which gives many
much confidence, seeing the King so well inclined to favour
honest men, which he is known to be, and one that will never
abuse his trust. Besides, (which, indeed, is the chiefe,) he
manifests much care of God's servise, and never failes, morning
and evening, coming to prayers to the little closett, nor being
an attentive hearer att sermons; so as ther is all good signs
that God hath set him over this kingdom for a blessing. This, I
know, you will be glad to hear from one you believe would wright
no untruth to you, and that hath made me (though I am not
<P 127>
much disposed to wright newse) sett down this much. To which I
will adde, that our destined Queene is with all possible speede
expected hear, for whos com~ing; the coronation will be stayed,
that that, and her mariadge and entrie, may be all but one
charge: but the first mariadge in France will be instantly, the
King having sent his procsey to the King of France, that either
his brother or the Duke of Chevreux (which is Prince Joinville
that was here) may dispach that, so as the next month she is
expected; all else being fully concluded, and they in France
hastening the espousals. I am very glad to hear M=r= Bacon hath
recovered so good health, whos welcom shall ever be such whear I
am as I owe to his meritt and you; whos labor I do not pittie so
much but that I wish you would beare him companie to this
solitarie place, whear I do not desier to see many now living,
but yourselfe very much. I writt to my Lord Chamberlaine to lett
John Fenne know his answer, because he came not back hither;
and, had I binne sure when I should have seene him, I would
rather have spoken than writt, though I know in effect it will
be all one, for he knows by my lines as well as he could have
done by speach that I as earnestly affect the successe of my
recomendacion as I can doe any thing in his power to doe; and I
was so loth M=r= Glover should have any thing to impute to my
least delay, as I
<P 128>
writt so late the last night to my Lord Chamberlain, and
dispached John Fenne, as I could not send this from hence with
him, who went earlier than I was awake this morning, but make
haste itt may overtake him att London. The lying Papists cannot
be content to want my Lord Stuartt in the beadrole of those they
wold have thought for their glorie; but whosoever knew him
living, I hope, will reseave no such false opinion now he is
dead, who, eaven after he was speechless, gave evident
demonstracion (being asked by his chaplain) that he believed to
be saved by the meritts of Christ: yett, by the follie or
villeinie of a ficisian wayted on him (who was Popish), have
they got some colour to invent this slander, which I trust will
be cleared to all the world, as it is clear in itselfe to those
friends from whom he had not a reserved thought, and that knew
how far both in sound judgment as well as practise he was from
approving any point of their doctrine disagreeing with the creed
we profess. I pray God they knew him not so well to be the
boldest opposer of their ends as they used means for the
shortening of his noble dayes, which that they
<P 129>
wear unnaturally cutte off ther are strong suspicions in the
most; because being att first, by the testimonie of all the
surgeons phisicians and his owne servants, as fayer a corse as
ever their eyes beheld, in the space of three owres his hoole
body, head, and every part swelled so strangely and gangrened so
generally as it astonished them all; though the phisicians
affirme to have seene the like in pestilential fevers, when the
spots break not out afore death, and impute part of the cause to
the expedient of chafing his body, att least for the space of an
hour before he departed, with hotte cloths, and keeping itt to
close in the bed after. God only knows the truth, who, if he had
any wrong, I trust will in his justice declare it. It is true
that, when he was opened in his stomack and head, there appeared
nothing to confirm this jealosie, which makes the phisicians
confident it could be no poison they are in these parts
acquainted with; yett both myselfe and many other of his friends
rest not clear of doubt, though, but upon some farder evidence,
it is not to be stirred in; but if ever the least light can be
gotten, the feare of all mortal men should not hinder our just
prosecucion of so abominable a fact: which yett, if it wear so,
hastened our losse but a little; for all his vital parts wear so
decayed, as, by the judgment of the doctors, he could hardly
have lived out a year, which nobody that looked on him could 
<P 130>
have suspected; yett he himselfe told me this last winter that
he found such an inward decaye in himselfe as he knew he should
live but awhile; but, God knows, I conceived it to be but a
melancholy aprehension, seeing his health better to my thinking
than it had beene a year or two before, for his spleene seemed
to trouble him lesse. But now I have many reasons to assure
myself he expected not to live out this year, though he was
sparingest to utter that to those he knew loved him best for
grieving them; yett now I call to mind many speeches of his I
heeded not when they wear spoken, might have made me take more
hold what his opinion was of his short continuance on earth
where he hath not left such another; nor any creature so great a
loser as I in the death of a friend, whom, if it had pleased God
to have longer spared us, would at this tyme both to the publick
and his private friends have binne that wee must not look to see
any other. But God saw us not worthy of such a blessing, whos
will, as itt is ever best, whatsoever itt apear to oure sense,
so must wee submitt ourselves to itt in all things, though it is
the hardliest practised lesson of all we learne in religion. My
thoughts are, and ever will be, full of his memorie, which makes
me tedious when any thing draws me into discourse of him; yett
will I not excuse this temper, because it is a duty I owe him in
this detracting tyme, when those
<P 131>
that durst not have breathed amis on his leaste action while he
lived will now ventur as much as in them lies to slubber his
fame, when they shall thinke themselves out of the hearing of
those would make them keepe in their venom, or make them smart
for uttering it at the least. And now I have donne this, it is
tyme I ende, whos love and respect to you shall be endless, in
which, to my sorrow, you cannot have so much advantage as I have
satisfaction to know myselfe for your most affectionate and
faithful, though most unfortunate friend, L. Bedforde.
   P.S. Dear Madam, com~ende me affectionately to M=r= Bacon,
whom if you will bring hither this springe, I hope you would
both find good by our ayr, which hitherto hath held free from
infection; and should be glad to see any of yours, too, with
you.
More Lodge, this 12=th= of April [\1625\] .

<Q COR 1625 DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 131>
[} [\LXXXIV. DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
My most honored Lady,
   I can let noe mesenger pass without the remembrance of my
loue and seruis to you. This toune afords noe newes, onely this,
which I thinke you
<P 132>
will be sory for, that M=rs= Anne and M=rs= Ueare Cooks are
become soe much the prouder sins thay weare aires; for thar
brother is uery latly deade of a burning feauor, and the land
fales betwene them. My ould Lady Cook presents her seruis to
you, and is a sade woman for the ruine of her howes. My Lady
Nethersole is not yet gone, but goes shortly. Thus, with the
remembrans of my neuer enough aknowledged loue and seruis to
you, I rest your most faithfull frend and humble seruant,
Dorothe Randolph.
[\1625.\]

<Q COR 1625 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 133>
[} [\LXXXV. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Deare Sister,
   I am very sorry in deed to understand by your servant that
you are not in good health, & the more bee cause I heare that it
is an ague that travills you att this present: it is the desease
that dooes att this tyme moste predomynate, for wee heare, the
Lorde bee praysed for it! that the plague is lessenned att the
leste 3000 a week of the proportyon of what it hath bin. Your
servant founde mee att Colchester this daye, beeing Sondaye,
where I have bin eaver sence Frydaye night past. I am inployed
to survaye these marrytanyan parts, for to rayse sutch workes or
take sutch order as I shall thincke fyttest for the presurvatjon
of the towne & haven of Colchester. I have with mee 500 foote &
a troope of hors, beesids 200 foote which I founde in the towne
beefore my aryvall. The daye after I came theather beeing
Satterdaye, I spent it sollely inspecting the harbore & the
towne: the sayme night I received letters from my Lord of
Warrick to hasten my retourne to the army with all expedytyon,
for that, hee rights, since my coming from that, the enymye is
drawne downe with more forses to Donkerick, & 
<P 134>
that all there fleet is drawne out of their harbore, & lyes
underneath the castle of the towne, reddy to seet sayle; upon
which newes I have sent a curryer this daye back to my Lord, to
advertis him of the present estate of the place, & to lett him
know that one Tusedaye morning by bracke of the daye, God
willing, I pourpose to bee att the army. The troops are not
lyckely to seaver this good whyle yett. You maye bee assured to
heere from mee, as occasion shall offer it selfe to me,
contjneually: but I dooe want the assistance of servants
excedingly; my Lord of Warrick was fayne to lend mee his page to
attend mee this jorny. I have received the fortje pounde from
your servant which I wrjt unto you for; for the which I am much
your servant, & I must desier you to paye your selfe againe with
your one money. My pore wyfe I am shewer is much distresed for
that shee hath not hard from mee neaver sence my coming from
hir; neather dooe I knowe how to send unto hir, pore creature!
to comforte hir. I praye, remember my love to my brother Bacon &
to all your lyttle ones; &, I praye, entertayne the treu love of
   Your eaver: affec' brother & servant,
   T. Meautys.
Colchester, Sept. the 18=th= 1625.
   To my deare sister the Lady Cornewallis, att her howse att
Browme, these, Suffolk.

<Q COR 1626 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 135>
[} [\LXXXVI. FREDERIC CORNWALLIS TO HIS MOTHER, JANE LADY
CORNWALLIS.\] }]
Maddam,
   To give your La=pp= a testimonie that as I grow older in
yeares, soe I doe the like in filiole affection and dutie
towards you, I thought it became mee not to discontinue my
accustomed pledge therof in an humble and ioyfull congratulation
of your La=pp's= arrivall (by God's good providence) in health
and happines unto the end of this ould yeaur, w=th= a noe lesse
happy and propiceious entrance into the new. And because to
honor father and mother is the first commandem=nt= with promise,
as alsoe for that I may not forget that your Ladiship hath beein
to mee insteade of both even from my cradle hitherto, it is of
noe small consequence to the length and happines of my owne life
to pay this duty, both yearly and dayly, of offering up my
prayers to Almighty God for the continuance and preservation of
yours; and doe therfore heare pray from the bottome of my heart
that this new yeare may be as noe yeare to your age, and as a
yeare of many harvests to your content and comfort. I presume
likewise (so priviledged by the usuall ceremony of this time) to
p'sent your La=pp= w=th= a petty newyear's-gift hearinclosed, as
unworthy (I confess) your La=pp's= wearing or owning as is hee
<P 136>
that pursents it; but the approach and admission to your
La=pp's= presence and benigne acceptance may give worth to both.
Soe humbly asking your blessing, I am, with the trouth of my
heart,
   Your La=pp's= not lesse dutifull than obliged humble sonne,
   F. Cornwalleis.
[\Jan=y= 1625-6.\]

<Q COR 1626 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 136>
[} [\LXXXVII. NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY CORNWALLIS.\] }] 
Sweet Hart,
   For the business w=ch= called me from you so suddaynely, I
may truely say, I cam vpp w=th= a full resolution to auoyd yt;
but my Lo. Marshall was unsatisfiable, assuring me of honor to
descend to you from thence, & not the contrary, & preferring
this order farr beyond the barronetts, as being the most antient
of this land. Vppon his com~ands, w=th= the perswasion of my
other friends, I haue embarqued my self in yt, God send me good
shipping! yt being already a greater trouble to me then fitts
w=th= my disposition; but I must now go thorough, w=ch=
perforemed I shall not be long absent from you. In the meane
tyme, I desier yo=e= assurance of my true affection, who am
   Onely yo=es=, Nath. Bacon.
<P 137>
   Newes little. My Lo. of Essex's business compounded. The
French King geueth no sattisfaction to o=e= embassadors, nor
will retourne o=e= shipps. Great grumbling on both sides. The
Queen will not be crowned w=th= o=e= cerimonies, wherfore her
coronation is putt off. Cecill generally taxed.
[\January 1625-6.\]
   To his best respected friend the La. Cornewalleys, at Broome,
geue these.

<Q COR 1626 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 137>
[} [\LXXXVIII. SIR NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   I haue, I belieue, much deceiued yo=e= expectation concerning
my retourne, but I haue had a just excuse, the extremity of the
weather & myne owne indisposition of body; notw=th=standing
w=ch=, I should haue ventured my retourne as this day, had not
the King strayghtly com~anded all of o=e= order, both new &
ould, to attend this day at Westminster, furnished w=th= horse &
footmen after the best 
<P 138>
manner, from whence we ar to ride by torch light to the Lo.
Maior's to a great feast ther specially prepared for vs. Some
other attendance also is reported to be geuen the K. the next
day by vs, but yt is not yett certayne. Newes her is little;
nothing done in parliament. The peace betwixt the French King &
Rochell certaynly concluded. The Duke de Rohan made prime peer
of France. Mounseir Subise to receiue a yearly pension of
100,000 crownes. O=e= shipps retourned from Rochell. Tomorrow or
Weddensday the Queen's mask is to be shewen, w=ch= is in the
manner of a play, she being a speciall actor in yt. Nothing
more, but to tell you I neuer had a greater desier to be w=th=
you, w=ch= I desier you to belieue as from him who is
   Onely you=rs=, Nath. Bacon.
February [\1\] [\1625-6\] , this Moonday.
   To his best respected friend the Lady Jane Bacon, at Broome,
geue these.

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 138>
[} [\LXXXIX. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   Rather then send away this messenger empty, I scribble you
such newes as I have picked up by the highway, and that the
coronation houlds, both of King and Queene, on Candlemas day,
with as
<P 139>
little noyse and ceremony as possibly may bee; the L=ds=, as is
sayd, being spared the charge of roabes, and required onely to
wear their coronets. My Lo. of Holdernes is alive againe. The
syde saddle is a making, and wee talked of nothing last night
but that and bathing, which I sweate to hear. My Lo. of Essex,
they say, is at court, and no speach of any quarrell thear. All
this I present to you as I reseaved it last night from our
Knight of the Bath and Nedde Eltenhead, who mett us last night
at Pukeridge from London; but theyr intelligence and relations
were soe ill putt together as did little edify me, eyther in
belief or knowledge. I take leave to kisse your hands, and to
have my love and servise cordially recom~ended to your best
beloved; from whose presence and conversacions, more acceptable
and agreeable to mee then any I can meete with till I meete them
againe, I am so newly weaned as that I have much adoe not to bee
froward, and to
<P 140>
cry Mam, Dadde, Dub. deare, if any body anger mee.
   Your La=pp's=, &c. T. M.
[\Feb=ry= 1, 1625-6.\]

<Q COR 1626 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 140>
[} [\XC. SIR NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   I am very glad of yo=e= health in the contry. I do also
conclude of the welfare of all ours w=th= you, otherwise, I
perswade myself, I should haue vnderstoode yt by you; &, for
little Jane in perticular, I should haue bin glad to haue
vnderstood some of her new language. My Lady of Bedford is well
& in towne, vnto whome I haue presented yo=e= servise. The Kinge
was crowned yesterday w=th= greate pomp at Westminster. For
other newes her is little; some do say that the Earle of Holland
hath compounded the business betwixt the French King & Rochell,
& that o=e= shipps ar retourning. God grant yt may be true!
Vppon the next Sunday earles ar to be created, some say 8. The
next weeke I intend to see you; in the meane tyme I com~end vnto
you the most true affection of him who is onely
   Yo=rs=, Nath. Bacon.
February 3 [\1625-6.\]
   To his best respected friend the Lady Bacon, at Broome, geue
these.

<Q COR 1626 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 141>
[} [\XCI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   I have not receiued any letter from you this week, w=ch=
maketh me hope that you & yo=rs= ar well, otherwise I presume I
should haue vnderstood yt: for my self & the rest of yo=e=
friends her, we ar all in health (God be thancked), my La. of
Bedford excepted, who hath bin excedingly ill of the gout, & is
little recouvered yett. For news, we haue very little, nothing
being as yett done in parliament. Ther hath bin 8 earles
created, the Lo. Wentworth, Andouer, the Treasurer, Mandiuill,
and others. Yesterday ther was a quarrell at Medlye's ordenary
betwixt the Lo. Henry Paulett & S=r= Will. Sturton; they went
secretly in to a chamber & fought. Paulett is 
<P 142>
runn thorough the body, not likely to liue; the other, hurt in
iij places, is apprihended. I am now almost sattisfied w=th=
London, & do intend this next week to retourne; in the meane
tyme I com~end vnto you my best loue, wishes, & prayers for all
health & happiness, & am
   Onely yo=rs=, Nath. Bacon.
February 10 [\1625-6\] .
   To his best respected friend the La. Jane Bacon, at Broome,
geue these.

<Q COR 1626 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 142>
[} [\XCII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NATHANIEL BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   At my last wrightinge vnto you I thought to haue seen you
before this tyme, but by reason of the extremity of the weather
I haue bin enforced to stay longer, hauing gotten a great could,
common to moste her, by reason of w=ch= I haue bin constrayned
to keep my chamber these 4 dayes, & wher I haue bin honored
w=th= a speciall visite by my Lo. Marshall & my Lo. Maltreuers.
I haue sent one of my seruants w=th= these to lett you
vnderstand the cause of my stay, & I do intend to follow my self
so soone as I dare, w=ch= I hope wil be about the beginning of
Shrouetyde. For newes, little is yett done in parliament but
snarling on
<P 143>
both sides, & much muttering agaynst the Duke, vnto whome ther
happened, in his going to parliament, an accedent, by many
reputed ominous; for betwixt the court & Westminster his bridle
would not hould vppon his horse's head, but being twise mended,
at the last yt fell quite of, w=th= the plume of feathers, to
the ground. Ther hath bin some distaste betweene the King &
Queene by meanes of the French embassador, who left the court in
a pett & departed for France, but was enforced to retourne, M=r=
Mountague being sent in his stead. The Admirall's shipp of
Dunkirke was lately blowne vp & quite lost, by meanes of ij
Hollanders w=ch= serued in her & now wer desirous to do ther
contry seruise, both w=ch= escaped. My La. of Bedford is yett
verry ill of the goute, & my La. of Sussex very ill of a could.
I long much to be at home w=th= you, which shal be so soone as
possible w=th= my health I may: in the meane tyme my dayly
prayers to attend you, & I desier to be esteemed in all
affection onely
   Yo=es=, Nath. Bacon.
February 16 [\1625-6\] .
   To his best respected friend the La. Jane Bacon, at Broome,
geue these.

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 144>
[} [\XCIII. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   In my last to your La=p= last weeke by the Berry carrier I
did, in a sort, resolve not to write againe untill I had been
repayd with a lyne or two from your hand, for some three or
fower letters your La=p= is in arriere to me; but to show that
all occasions offered of doing you servise winne ground upon me
against any resolucyons whatsoever to the contrary, I could not
possibly omitt the oportunity offered me by this bearer of
scribbling to you rather nothing than not at all. Our parlament
falls not as yett upon the mayne of busynes, it being but early
days with us and many members absent. Onely Sir Edward Cooke's
election hath bene debated, and is like to be determined against
him, within ten dayes; and yf he and the rest of his fellow
sheriffs be excluded, as it is conceaved they will, we shall
have a tame howse, and the King will master his own ends without
much adoe. My cosin's health did prophesy of this cold weather
some few days ago, for his cough beganne to trouble him, and
makes him wish himselfe at Broome. Myne is after the oulde rate,
now and
<P 145>
then a fitt of short breathinge. God in heaven maintaine you in
health and all yours!
   Yo=r= La=pp's= all ever, T. M.
Feb=ry= 16 [\1625-6\] .

<Q COR 1626 LRUSSEL>
<A LUCY RUSSEL>
<G F>
<P 145>
[} [\XCIV. THE COUNTESS OF BEDFORD TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Madam,
   I take extreme kindly your sending to visit mee, which I
should not have delayed an ower thanking you for, but that itt
is so busy a tyme heare, both about what consernes the publicke 
and my owne privat, as I have, against my will, binne hindered
from dispatching your man according to my desier and purpos; but
the assurance he carries of my present health I know will make
you excuse the length of his staye. My feare of relapsing makes
me content to punish myselfe this spring by following a course
of phisicke Sir Theodor Mayerne hath putt mee into, though I am
very incredulous that itt can prevent my having more fitts of
the goute; howsoever, when I am trobled with any, they are
accompanied with such accidents of sicknes as shows they proseed
from such humors as phisicke uses to correct, against which I
have too rebellious a spleene I doubt to be brought into such
obedience as not faster to
<P 146>
power out the souernes therof into my stomache, and distill itt
into other parts, then all the poticarie's drugs will be able to
correct. What I do, therfore, is rather because itt shall not be
layd to my charge that I neglect the meanes of health, then out
of any great hope of cure by itt, which weather I have or no,
God, I trust, will give mee thankfulnes to Him and patience till
His apointed tyme of releasing mee from all misserie; of which
wee are yett like to have in generall more and more, if this
Parlement and the King part not upon better termes then yett
they stand, the King having declared himselfe stiffe one way,
and they growing stronger and stronger in their resolucions
another. They have had som way given them, which is understood
by them as a good signe of the King's relenting, who may, if he
please, have of them what none of his predecessors ever had of
their people, so they may with all have their bargaine, without
which they thinke all their liberality would be no better then
cast away: what the event will be, a fewe dayes more will show.
In the mean tyme my Lo. Marshall remains att the
<P 147>
Tower, though my Lo. Chamberlain is laboring to gett his prison
changed to his owne house at Highgate. I wishe another tyme had
binne taken for that hasty busynes, in regard of the want of so
able a man at this tyme in the upper house, wheather ther is no
probability he will be suffered to com this secion though he
wear enlarged. All other kind of nuse for the present lies dead
hear, exsept itt have some relacion to the Parlement, and my
ower of persecution is com; therfore, deare Lady, farwell. Lett
your love to me, and confidence in myne to you, continue alike;
for, truste me, the one is highly valued, and to lessen the
other you shall never have just cause given you by
   Your most affectionat, faithful freind and servant,
   L. Bedford.
   Believe mee, your son Fred. hath my prayers that he may be so
blessed from heaven as that your comfort in him may daylie
increase. With many thankes to S=r= Nathaniel Bacon, do mee the
favor to retorne my best salutacions, to whom I was extreme
sorry I could not, at his being heare, do those litle servises I
ought to your husband,
<P 148>
and my respect of himselfe; but itt was so late before I knew
att all of his being in the list of the Knights of the Bath,
after which I inquired not, and so lived in ignorance till his
owne coming to me, as on that alone I can charge my ill hap.
S=t= Jeames's Streete, this last of March [\1626\] .
   I cannot close my letter without being a begger to you to
helpe me, if you can, to another good and fine tumbler, being a
comodity not to be gotten in thes parts. Thus, you see, I cannot
leave my custum of robbing you.
   To my noble and deare freind the Lady Bacon, att Broome.

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 148>
[} [\XCV. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   I am righte gladde that I have found out at last, which I
understood by yours receaved last night, the way and stile to
make my letters acceptable, which is, I perceave - for such was
that letter you seeme to approove - by being short, and making
profession of my desire and happines to contribute any thing
towards your health and welfare, which I doe as cordially affect
now as then, and shall ever doe the same while I am, T. Meautys.
[\April 1626.\]
<P 149>
   Your brother went for the Low Countries yesterday, with hope
to retourne some 6 weekes hence. His lady remaynes with my Lady
Sussex. My Lo. S=t= Alban is dead and buried.

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 149>
[} [\XCVI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   I receaved your La=pp's= by the carrier of Berry, by whome I
send thease; it came to my hands some minutes before my going
into the country, which makes me retourne thease in more
scribbling wise then otherwise I should. And although I perceave
by yours that you cannot find in your heart, or at leaste in
your penne, to invite me to Broome, though I did in a sorte
begge it of you in my last; and that the proverbe, which sayeth
that "He is an ill dogge that's not worth whistling," makes me
conceave that you think little lesse of me, that think me not
worth the inviting;
<P 150>
yett, to show you that I cannot find in my heart to take any
thing in ill part at your hands longer then needes must, I will
endeavour to obtaine of myself and my occasions to waite on you
somtimes this so~mer, yf I may understand from you by your next
how you dispose of your owne residence this vacacion, for by
this day fortnight I shall retourne for London with my Lord
Wentworth, who is then to goe for Fraunce, and will then hope to
meete with a lyne or two from you hear, that may reassure me of
your health. And for the rest that concernes myself, synce it
comes so dryly and cautiously from you, I shall arme myself with
as much patience as I may, and as you may expect from y=r=
La=pp's= all and ever to love and serve you,
   T. Meautys.
   Thear came a messenger last night from my Lord Veere, who
brings good newes of a blowe given the enemy, to the cutting off
two thousand of theyr men at least, some of them persons and
com~aunders of the best quality, with the loss of 5 or 6 of the
States' side, comon souldiers, only; ffor
<P 151>
the water fought for them, and did the execution without blowes.
   Pray let my cosin Randolph understand that his father is soe
ill that thear is little hope of his recovery, and I think it
wear considerable for him, in relation to his office, to come up
and take it into his care.
[\April 1626.\]

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 151>
[} [\XCVII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ex=lnt= good Lady and Cosin,
   I wrote to your La=pp= last weeke by the Berry carrier, and
inclosed it in my cosin Frederick's letter, but understood that
the carrier of Disse called afterwards at my house, and, hearing
I had putt my letters into the hands of the Berry carrier,
resolved to call for it from him and soe deliver it himselfe.
How they have agreed on it I know not, but would have been
willing to understand in your next wheather it came to your
hande. I wrote to my cosin, your husband, and put it into M=r=
Chetwin's hands on Monday last. The King is not at leasure to
thinke of my Lord of Arundell's reduction from the Tower, but he
is, mee thinks, as a man forgotten already. Our Parlement
proceedings are froward enough; and those businesses we embrace
first, and please ourselves best in, which have a left eye upon
the Duke. 
<P 152>
But we barke hitherto against the moone, which is above our
reach. We shall, within a day or two, bee roundly put to it for
a present supply to defend the kingdome and setting of a new
fleete to sea; for our daungers threaten us by the great
preparacyons of our enemy, whearof thear is dayly advertisement.
My Lord Generall Cecill hath not yett been admitted to kisse the
King's hands. Hee was on Monday last before the counsell table,
with the rest of the com~anders and officers in chief in that
ymployment. Thear was demaunded of him a particular journall and
account of the counsells and actions since the going out of the
fleete. Hee broke outt into a confused and passionate discourse
of his hard condicion, to be prejudged and decried in com~on
voyce, as himself said hee was, even as farr as to balletts; but
was withall very confident to give theyr Lordships a good
account of his conducting the whole affayre, and doubted not but
to come off with honor for his particular carriage, though it
pleased not God to give successe to the enterprize; and soe
desired a furder day, for that his papers and bookes, whearin
his proceedings wear exactly registred, wear not yett come a
shoare. The Plate fleete, I perceave, was theyr chiefest design,
and they steered, it seemes, soe right a course for it as that
they had 7 of theyr shipps in chase; but ours being
<P 153>
leaky, and marriners weake, and victualls spent, could not reach
them. Sir Thomas Meautys and his lady are in town, at M=r=
Deake's, an upholsterer in Fleete Streete. His lady is now
daungerously ill of a burning feavor. Shee hath been visited
from Clerkenwell, and Sir Thomas hath been thear; and wee are
all friends, soe long as it will last. And soe I greet you, and
all yours, with the sincerest affection and devocyon to serve
you & yours, T. M. 
[\April 1626.\]

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 153>
[} [\XCVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My very best Lady and Cosin,
   I receaved yours by M=r= Proud, the minister, and purpose to
write to you then againe by him. In the mean time, I take the
freedom to tell you, that yf upon the death of M=r= Cotton, of
whose office in our chamber I had a second reversion, I proceed,
as I am in treaty, to buy him out that is in possession, and so
to gett it for three lives of my own name, when I will reckon
upon your La=pp's= purse to assist mee with the loane of 600+L,
for
<P 154>
about that sum I must deposit at first, and 300+L more
afterwards, which is the full rate I must pay; and for security
I will eyther make over the 200+L p=r= ann. of my brother
Glover's, the office itself, or any other security your counsell
shall advise. Yt concernes mee to hear by the next carrier,
which I would gladly wear by him of Berry, on Thursday, how
farre you are like to pleasure mee hearin; and yf you take this
to be any over freedome with you, onely pardon it, and I will
take it for a warning till I may have furder merited it at your
hands.
   However, I shall rest at yo=r= La=pp's= devotion altogether
to serve you, T. Meautys.
   I have one fetter more put upon my legge to imprison mee in
London, for thear is a new Counsell of Warre instituted, and I
pointed out for one to attend it. Yt consists all of privy
counsellors, unless 3, namely, Wimbledon, Tilberry, and Colonell
Ogle.
Friday [\May 1626\] .

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 154>
[} [\XCIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My singular good and noble Lady,
   I cannot acknowledge inough your readines to pleasure mee
with the sum you write of, nor cannot take thought inough to
find myself good for nothing whearin to pleasure you againe.
Onely this I have to offer uppe to you, and yett it is noe
<P 155>
more then you had long since, namely, whatsoever I am, or may
bee, to bee at your disposing. For security however, you are
pleased, in confidence of mee and favor to mee, to decline it;
yett I must take leave to deale as safely for you as you have
done lovingly and suerly with mee, and upon the receipt of the
moneyes am resolved to send you sealed a bond from my eldest
brother and myself, to such person as you shall nominate to have
the bond made, and this with as little noyse or notice of the
favor done mee as you shall direct or wish. For the moneyes the
sooner they come the welcomer; but, by cause I could not collect
from your letter whether they mought be with most conveniency
sent up by som servant of your own, or otherwise that I could
send a servant of myne to receave them theare, I am somwhat at a
stand untill I may find by your next what course you will
propound on that behalf. Thus, with a heart as full of affection
to serve you, as a head full of payne and aking, being scarcely
out of a sharpe fitt of tertian ague, which hath held me all
this morning I rest, 
   Your La=pp's= in sicknes and health, living and dying, all
and ever, T. Meautys.
This Friday, May 19th, from my house in the Strand [\1626\] .
   The inclosed from Sir Thomas Meautys I send, to the end my
cosin may extract the newes of those parts out of them; and so
retourne me the letters, yf you please.
<P 156>
   Yesterday it was debated in the upper house, wheather the
Duke should be com~itted, or at least sequestered from the house
during the examination and proceeding against him. Hee carried
it by voyses, and yett had no use of proxies, whearof hee hath,
as is sayd, 15 in store, which shows his case is not desperate.

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 156>
[} [\C. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever dearest Lady and Cosin,
   This messenger going from Toddington to my Lady Smith's in
Norfolk, and Culford not being much out of his way, gives mee
the meanes of sending thease, together with such occurrences as
I meet with hear, sent mee from London. You may, if you please,
at your best convenience impart them to Sir Drue, and thearby
acquitte mee to him in part of some payments of this kind. Thus,
waiting all occasions and minutes to serve you, I aske leave to
kisse your deare and precious
<P 157>
hands, together with all those made out of them, whearby you
have obliged,
   Y=or= La=pp's= for ever to love and serve you,
   T. Meautys. 
May [\1626\] .
   The instructions concearning preaching, though some say they
are to be printed, yett are not to be authorized and published,
as was conceaved, by proclamacyon, but to bee recom~ended onely
by letters under his Ma=ties= signature to the two archbishops.
   I am this morning going with my Lord of Cleveland for London;
his Lady goes not till the Kinge's retourne from Newmarkett.

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 157>
[} [\CI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My best Lady and Cosin, 
   I receaved both yours by Nutte, the carrier, and in answer to
the first, which is soe carefull and sollicitous of my health, I
can but first thanke you in as much earnest as you are pleased
to expresse on my behalf, and then lett you know that I am,
<P 158>
God be thanked! much better now then when I fell sicke; this
ague having, apparently, evacuated much of that humour whearwith
my lungs wear wont to labour, whearby I am grown friendly with
it, and think of it, now 'tis past, rather as my physician then
a disease. I am sorry to find, both by your letter and by the
messenger, that my cosin's health is noe better; but I comfort
myself in that observacion he makes of the time, as hoping that
I shall hear by the next that we are twynnes as well in
recovering together as in falling sick, otherwise he will but
bind me over in good manners to undergoe a relapse, for I shall
take the lesse comfort in my recovery that it hath gotten the
start of his. As for the moneyes, I will send sometimes the next
weeke by an immediate messenger from hence. Our Parlament was
this day adjourned till Thursday next. The upper howse is not
satisfied with the reasons of the King's detayning my Lo. of
Arundell from them, and are resolved to press it furder. The
King withdrawes not his countenance or protection one jotte from
the Duke. God send us all the light of His countenance, and then
all will end well.
   Yo=r= La=pp's= all and ever, T. Meautys.
Strand, this Thursday [\June 2, 1626\] .
   My sister Glover desires to be excused for not wrighting by
this passage, which she confesseth 
<P 159>
she both ought, but that she was called away to hould a Lady
Butler's back, one of the last sisters of the Bath. 
   Sir John Eliott is released, and restored to the howse.

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 159>
[} [\CII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best and dearest Lady and Cosin,
   I reseaved yours by my man, Knight, accompanied with that
horse load of favor and friendly curtesy, which you pleased to
mention in your former letters; which seasonable piece of
friendshipp expressed by your La=pp= towards mee and my
occasions although I can never acknowledge, yett give me leave
to reckon of it but as treasure in silver in comparison of that
other in gould, which was the hopes you gave mee of kissing your
hands hear ere long; whearin however you have somwhat fayled,
for though, mee thinks, with mee, who number dayes and howers
till I see you, it is already a great while since I drank in
those hopes, yett will hope on still, and leave you thus farr
without excuse as to tell you that thear are two houses in the
Strand at your devotion, my own and Sir
<P 160>
Thomas Wilson's, who lyeth and his family at Whitehall, though I
must confesse I shall wish my own house on fier every time I see
you passe by it to sleepe in any other. Thearfore, as you tender
my rest and happines, sweete Madam, think not, I beseech you, of
resting yourselfe under any other roofe, and be pleased rather
to lett mee see you then hear from you againe. And now lett me
presume to putt a new piece of trouble upon you, which is to
cause your servant to learne certaynly the day of M=r= Cotton's
death, and to lett me understand it by the next; for ever since
that day the profitts of the office belong to mee, and are to be
accounted to mee by his deputy and clerks, and the difference of
a few dayes may in or out of my way half a hundred pounds. M=r=
Morse was much conversant with him, as I have heard him say, and
can, peradventure, satisfy this question. The Duke hath this day
made his answere to our charge against him; an ingenuous and
cleare answere, and very satisfactory, as is conceaved, to all
indifferent eares. My Lord of Arundell was this day restored to
the house; it appeares not as yett wheather he be in ... or not
against the Duke, or how he will play his game. We talk much of
great forces both by sea and land in readines to come from
Spayne. We have 30 sayle of good shippes shortly to putt to sea.
Our house quarrells the election of the Duke to be Chancellor of
<P 161>
Cambridge, as an affront done to the house; the King hath sent
messages to our house to forbear questioning it. Tomorrow we
are, I understand, to debate what is to be done in it. The King
hath sent the University a letter of thanks for electing him; 
and so doe I to you, for continuing mee in your good favor and
affections, who am
   All your own, T. M.
[\June 8=th= 1626.\]

<Q COR 1626 EBACON>
<A EDMUND BACON>
<G M>
<P 161>
[} [\CIII. SIR EDMUND BACON TO SIR NATHANIEL BACON.\] }]
Brother Nath.
   Yt was tolde me yesterday from Burye, that one cause of your
goinge up to London ys to cut of the intayle of Culforde and the
rest of the landes, which in much love weare confer'd upon you.
Whether I have any interest or not therin ys utterly unknowne
unto me, for in my father's tyme I never was made acquainted
with any parte of the conveyances; and yf I be in remaynder, my
dayes are so farre spent, that yt weare too partiall a thinge
for me to feed myselfe with any expectation: but yt ys like yt
concernes others, for in what belonges to myselfe I finde that
he hath had a very strict desyre to uphold his famyly in the
meanes he left, which I signify unto you, that you might
<P 162>
have a greate care how you proceede in this busynes, which
importes a good parte of the estate. But no more of this matter:
it concernes me more to have you respecting your health, and to
entreate you to have a care that you oppresse not your body or
your mynd with too much agitac~on, for they are both greate
enemyes to weake spirites.
   The proroginge of the Parlament hath given me lybertye to
take a vewe of Rotten Thornage before I goe to London, whether I
am setting forwarde this morning. And thus I rest,
   Y=r= very loveing brother,
   E D M. Bacon.
[\June 1626.\]

<Q COR 1626 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 162>
[} [\CIV. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   I reseaved your La=pp's= by M=r= Morse, with the note
inclosed, touching M=r= Cotton's death. This morning M=r= Morse
advertized mee in post hast that thear was a messenger going
towards Broome; hee tooke mee napping, and, before I was broad
<P 163>
awake, for his post's sake I had finished thease. Your
hospitality to my sister and hers hath unhappily deprived mee, I
perceave, of dayes, if not weekes, of your company hear, who
shall count every daye a weeke till I see you; the rather for
that, after this month ended, my month of attendance being next,
and the King meaning to lye most part of that month at
Greenwich, I shall spend most of my dayes thear, and soe loose
more of your company, which vexeth mee aforehand to think of,
and will vex mee more when it happeneth then otherwise, yf you
had come to town sooner, I could have done: onely my comfort
will be, that I can remember, when I am absent, that you are
pleased to sleep under my roofe, and that my house doth you some
service instead of mee. Our Parlement is in pieces and quite
dissolved. My Lo. of Bristow close prisoner in the Tower. My Lo.
of Arundell confined to his mother's house, as before. No lower
house men com~itted as yett, but some of the most active amongst
them com~anded not to depart the town till his Ma=ties= pleasure
furder known. The King borrowes a hundred thousand pounds of the
city, for which he pawnes his juells and plate: this chiefly to
sett out a fleete of 30 sayle, whearunto 20 sayle of Hollanders
are ready to joyne. Present my affectionate
<P 164>
love and service, good Madam, to my good cosin; and tell him, yf
he comes to town, I will shew him melons forwarder then his at
Broome, and procure him the receipt how to improve his owne,
which is a journey, I hope, not altogether lost.
   I rest your La=pp's= all and ever, T. M.
This Monday morning, June 19 [\1626\] .
   Pray be pleased to salute my sister Claxton and her husband
from mee, yf they be still with you. I think it wear no ill wish
to wish them at Livermore againe, for that they had wont to take
it for granted that the mother's death would much mend theyr
case.

<Q COR 1626 NA2BACON>
<A NATHANIEL BACON>
<G M>
<P 164>
[} [\CV. SIR N. BACON TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sweet Hart,
   Uppon Thursday last I left London, thincking to haue bin
w=th= you this day, but, at my taking horse, I raysed by
coughing a little bload, w=ch= made me come that night but to
Burntwood. The next day in the morning I found myself disposed
to bleed agayne, w=ch= made me venture no farther than
Esterford, wher, presently after my coming in, the vayne opened
agayne, wher I raysed some half a spoonfull. Now, this day I
intend to come no farther then Colchester, wher I shall haue
Doctor Duke's help, if need require. Uppon Monday, God willing,
I intend to reach Bury, whither I desier you to send me, uppon
Tuesday morning
<P 165>
next, yo=e= coach, to bring me home w=th= the more ease. All
yo=e= friends in London do salute you. The Lady of Bedford is
reasonably well. The business of the Navie is now in question in
Parliament, but nothing done. Thus, with my best loue I leaue
you, desiring to be excused for briefness, being now in my bed;
from whence I desier you not to conclude any danger in me, for
my bleeding is stopped, & my cough less then yt hath bin any
tyme these iij. weeks. Bless ours, & kiss little Jane from me; &
so I rest,
   In all trew affection only y=rs=,
   Nath. Bacon.
Esterford, this Satterday morning [\June 1626\] .
   To his best respected friend the La. Jane Bacon, at Broome,
geu these.

<Q COR 1626 PCOTTON>
<A PHILIPPE COTTON>
<G F>
<P 165>
[} [\CVI. PHILIPPE COTTON TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deere & worthie Dawghter,
   I do acknowlidg my self much bownd to God, that hath given me
such a child to be so respective of so aged & infirme a mother
as I am, to belp & succor me, not being able, by reason of manie
greeuances, to stirr from home, w=ch= hath much afflicted me
that I cowld not frequent the howse of God as formerlie I have
donn; w=ch= now, by God's permision, and as w=th= helth He shall
inable me, y=or= good meanes egging me forward, I purpose to
redeeme. Deere dawghter, if I should stodi so
<P 166>
long tyme as I cowld stodie no longer, I should never be able to
find good words suffitient to express the well deservings of
y=or= liberall bownti w=ch= manie ways y=ou= have aforded me,
this y=or= greate and worthie present, w=ch= at this tyme y=ou=
have sent me, not being the lest; wheare of I shall have dayeli
occation to be putt in minde of, lifting up my hart to God w=th=
dayelie prayers to bless y=ou=, both in heaven & earth, to His
glori, for all y=or= comforts aforded me. Good dawghter, lett me
intreate y=ou= not to be offended w=th= y=or= mann for staying
so long, for I was the cawse, he being dayelie desierous to be
gonn; whose going I still hindred, for that I was desierous to
lett y=ou= know that my first iorney in it was to church, w=ch=
cowld not be effected no sooner. I pray y=ou= reme~ber my much
respected love to my worthie sonn Baconne & my good nephew
Meautys; my manie kinde thancks to him for his venison w=ch= he
sent me. So, from my hart praying God to bless y=ou= & all
y=ors=, I ever remain, y=e= trewlie affected mother,
   Philippe Cotton.
   I praie y=ou=, lett me heere of y=or= coming to London, & as
often as y=ou= cann; & I hope my nephew Meautys will be so good
as his word to me, w=ch= was that he wold bring y=ou= & the rest
of all my good children hether to me this sommer. Good dawghter,
I have given y=or= man fortie shillings, both for his charges
coming and going, & also in
<P 167>
gratuitie of the present hee browght me; had I benn better
provided w=th= monie, my rewarde should have beenn greator.
Stoke, October 23 [\1626\] .
   To my deere & worthie dawghter the Lady Jane Baconne, these.

<Q COR 1626 PCOTTON>
<A PHILIPPE COTTON>
<G F>
<P 167>
[} [\CVII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^PHILIPPE COTTON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Right deere & worthie Daughter,
   I do not well know how to find a good word out sufficient for
so worthie a child, which hath made her mother, if anie mother
cann be, bownd to her child. You have enchained me with such a
bound to you never to be dissolved, such is the rare vertue of
your so often benignities extended towards me, never to be
forgotten. By your brother Meautys I understand of your safe
being att London, with all your sweete children. Hoping now I
shall the oftener heere from you, I much desire, good daughter,
to be allowed to make a motion unto you, now you are in London,
a place of most conveniencie for such a purpose. My desire is
this, you wolde be pleased to aford me your picture; not for
that it might put in mind of you, for that needeth not, I having
you alreaddie so imprinted on my hart never to be forgotten, but
that I maie with comfort behoulde the aspecte of so worthie a
child. This is the end of my desires, which I hope you will not
denie me. I desire likewise to
<P 168>
be remembered to my good sonne Bacon, not forgetting my nephew
Meautys, with all yours, whome, with yourselfe, I humblie pray
the eternall God to bless with all felisities both in heaven and
earth: and so I ever live your trewlie loving mother, 
   Philippe Cotton.
Coventry, Novemb. 17, 1626.

<Q COR 1627 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 168>
[} [\CVIII. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   I receaved yours by Nutte, and am sorry that his soddaine
departure hath soe turned my hower glasse that I have not time
to inquire and send you worde, so distinctly as otherwise I
would, of that which I assure myself would be wellcomest to you
in this letter, as it was in my last; namely, the health of your
best friend. Onely thus much I can say of it from M=rs= Dixon,
from whom I heard it some two dayes sinse, that it was in the
way of increasing to a perfect recovery. I should have been
right glad to have heard the like of my cosin's health, for
which, as for that of your La=p= and all yours, I shall dayly
pray as for myne owne, and remayne all and ever
   Yo=r= La=p's= to love and serve you,
   T. Meautys.
April 5th, 1627.

<Q COR 1627 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 169>
[} [\CIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   The oportunity of this messenger, whoe is to be back by
Tuesday night at Riddlesworth, and promised me to make Culford
in his way, invites me to gratulate your well coming to the end
of your first daye's journey, which I understood from Sir Thomas
Meautys, and to hope the like of your journey next day, and that
you found all well at Culford. Next, I take leave to tell you,
that I understand this night, upon speach with M=rs= Tucker,
that my Lady of Bedford wynnes still upon her health, and missed
her fitt yesterday. This I knew would mend the welcome of my
letter, and thearfore supping this night at my aunt Thomson's,
and hearing her accidentally speake of M=rs= Tucker, and that
she dwelt hard by, I tooke advantage of it to inquire of that
Lady's health. Black Pusse is apprehended and carried before Sir
Thomas Wilson, and convicted for a runaway; but, hir case being
baylable, my cosin
<P 170>
Randolph and myself have bayled hir, and soe you may require her
at my cosin Randolph's hands, with whom she is a sojourner.
Madam, I am so newly weaned from the company of my best friend,
that you may imagine how indisposed and froward I mought well
be, and that I could find nothing to still me but by busying
myself in writing, or doing something that mought look towards
the serving of you, then which nothing can be for ever more
acceptable to,
   Your La=pp's= to dispose as you list, 
   T. Meautys.
Easter night [\1627\] .
   Pray present my most affectionate love and servise to my
cosin Bacon.

<Q COR 1627 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 170>
[} [\CX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   I begged of you, in my last by Nutte the carriere, that I
mought partake of the happy tidings of your recovery soe soone
as it should please God to send it you; but, not having receaved
any lyne from you sinse, I am not a little perplexed what to
thinke of your health. I understood onely, by a letter from my
cosin, that it was a setled tertian ague, and that some fitts
had been very sharpe. I will both hope and pray that I may hear
that they
<P 171>
have done theyr worst then, and that you are in way of
recoverie; till when I shall be in a cold fitt of feare and
expectation touching the event of your sicknes. Next, lett me
impart to you, and aske your pardon, that, without your privity
and direction, I have presumed to apply the favour meant me long
synce by the Duke, for making a baronett, to the servise, I
hope, of my cosin Frederick. Quarrell me you may, as you use to
doe, for my forwardnes to affect and serve you and yours, for
other offence towards you I was never guilty of; but for this,
it is too late to intreat it, yf, peradventure, in disfavour of
me, you had a mind to it, for it hath already passed the signet
and privy seale, and will be to morrow by noone passed the great
seale. That which prevented me from acquainting you with it soe
seasonably as otherwayes I had done, was, that I was surprised
myselfe in this resolution to make use of Duke's promise in that
kinde on my cosin's behalfe, for, hearing that Sir Robert Crane,
young Wingfield, Drue Drurie's nephew, and some others of
Suffolk wear laboring for that dignity to be conferred upon
them, I concluded that no time must be lost; which, though it
seeme a circumstance, yett is substance in these cases, poynt of
precedency being noe indifferent thing, whearin I have handled
it that he shall be the first of that county of this last
edition of baronetts. And
<P 172>
least any apprehension, which you, by your favour, are apt
enough to take, should possess you, as yf I had hearin rather
endeavoured to picke a thank of your sonne officiously, then to
give you a clear argument of my affections to doe him a servise
for your sake; or least you should be in suspence whether any
disadvantage should hearby ensue to you in poynt of the
wardshipp eyther of his body or lands; be pleased to believe
that, for the first, he neyther knows from me of any the least
intention of myne to sett this on foote, neyther doe I want soe
much respect and love to yourself, or soe much piety to preserve
and endeare a sonne to a mother, as to handle it soe that every
circumstance of this worke should not appear to be derived
immediately and totally from your love and indulgence; and, for
the latter, that I am not soe precipitate or indifferent in that
which concernes you in point of interest as not first to have
advised, and been clearly resolved and satisfied without all
scruple and question by those who best know it, and particularly
by M=r= Attorney Generall and M=r= Attorney of the Court of
Wards, that thear is nothing of prejudice that can hearby ensue
to you touching his wardship eyther of body or lands. By the
next I purpose to send you the patent under the great seale; and
soe hearwithall send you, under the privy seale of my heart, the
<P 173>
most entire and sincere affections to serve you and yours, of
yo=r= La=pp's= all and ever to dispose of,
   T. Meautys.
May 4=th=, 1627.
   My Lo. of Bedford died on Tuesday last: my Ladie's recovery
is much doubted; her strength and spiritts being, as they say,
farre spent, and wearing out dayly by an untoward cough, which
is almost continuall. This I understood from M=rs= Dixon.

<Q COR 1627 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 173>
[} [\CXI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   Your not vouchafing, eyther by letter or message, to take
knowledge of the contents of my last to you touching my cosin
Fred., reprooves mee sufficiently of being in my last an
officious foole; and although, Madam, I shall take it for a
warning, yett when I reflect as well upon the affection and
singleness of heart whearwith I did it, as also upon the motives
which confined mee in point of time from acquainting you first
thearwithall, I plead not guilty of having deserved at your
La=pp's= hands to have my well meaning hearein to be soe passed
by as not worthy of a lyne or a message. And least those motives
should seem to be altogether fayned and imaginary, as I did
touch upon them then, soe I now offer them to your view in
thease payre
<P 174>
of letters from Sir Drue Drury to me, both concerning himself
and his nephew Wingfield; which I onely insist on to excuse mee
for acting the busines I before my acquainting and receaving
commission from you. And I was not ignorant that time in thease
cases, though it seeme a circumstans, yett is indeed substance;
precedency being a principall verbe, which my cosin Fred's
patent hath, both of Drue, and Wingfield, and of Sir Rob=t=
Crane; which in my poore discretion; considering they are all of
a county, was somwhat, and which had been lost if I had stayed
to send and to have heard from you first. And now, my dearest
friend, Lady, and cosin, I come to that which both affects and
perplexes mee more then any other thing in this woorld which can
come crosse upon mee, namely, the ill tidings of your want of
health, and the dayly fears, and apprehensions I have of your
growing worse; agaynst which I have no refuge but to Almighty
God with my dayly and instant prayers, which I shall as
earnestly doe as for my own soule; and, being obtained, give Him
thanks as for the greatest temporall blessing to mee upon earth.
   Yo=r= La=pp's= all and ever to love and serve you, 
   T. Meautys.
May 10=th=, 1627
<P 175>
   My cosin Fred=s= patent beares date the 4=th= of this
present; Drue's the 7=th= following; Wingfield's and Crane's are
not yet passed the seale. I could not send it now, as I
intended, by reason the inrolment of it, both in the Exchequer
and the Rowles, take up more time then I expected.
   I am not a little troubled to hear of my cosin Bacon's ill
health, and that I am good for nothing that may conduce to his
recovery; onely my prayers for him shall bee in as good earnest
as for the dearest friend and brother I have. 
   To my much hon=rd= Lady and Cosin the Lady Jane Bacon, at
Broome Hall, Suff. 

<Q COR 1627 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 175>
[} [\CXII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever dearest Lady and Cosin,
   The oportunity of this messenger being sent to Saxum gives me
as much time as serves to be accountable to your La=pp= of
myselfe and my journey, being now at Toddington, from whence I
am injoyned to make retourne to your La=pp= of the love and
respects of the Right Noble Lord and Lady hear. I reached
Hartford on Saturday before five o'clock, whear I was not the
less welcome for the place I came from, and your La=pp's=
friendly and loving remembrance which accompanied mee
<P 176>
thither; for with Harry Meautys's I send you the best and all
the retourne he can make, which is, to find an innermost roome
for you and yours in his dayly prayers. Soe, beseeching your
La=pp= to doe the like for him and mee, in yours, and desirous
to be numbered in the catalogue of your family, I ask your
blessing with the very mouth of my heart, and remain,
   Your La=pp's= all and ever, T. M.
   My Lord's brother arrived hear out of the Low Countries last
night, by whom I find that there was not such a thing as an army
on foot for the affayres of the Palatinate, all theyre's being
now in garrison. The peace between Spayne and them hovers
aloofe, and, if at all, not likely to be concluded in hast.
   Madam,
   If it may be without your trouble, I would gladly hear how it
fares with M=r= Claxton.
   Monday night [\1627\] .

<Q COR 1627 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 176>
[} [\CXIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   This bearer some weekes since having delivered mee a letter
from your La=pp=, and calling upon mee this day to know whether
I would retourne an
<P 177>
answere, therby gave mee an opportunity, which left mee without
excuse yf I had now omitted to write. And because it is not
unwoorthy your knowing, nor the repeating, though you may know
it already, nor unacceptable to you, what we have done and are
doing in Parliament, thease take leave to tell you, that on
Saturday last the King gave a full and satisfactory answer to
our petition concerning the liberty of the subject, and
propriety and exemption of his person and estate from any
illegal courses, which caused such expression of joy in
generall, as, whear tongue left, bells and bonfires began; and
the proceeding with the subsidies, which wear till then at a
stand, followed the next day in Parliament, and are ready to be
passed entirely within two or three days. Neverthelesse, wee goe
on with a remonstrance or informacion to his Ma=tie= contayning
the generall grievance of the realme, which wee have reduced to
thease heads, namely, fear of innovation of religion, and the
ill successes of our late forrain enterprizes, the ill state and
decay of our forts and castles, the generall want of powder and
all other sorts of ammunition requisite for the defence of the
realme, the decay of trade, the great losse and decay of the
shipping of the realme, the ill guarding of the narrow seas; and
ended in these very termes, that the excessive power of the Duke
of Buck=m= and the abuse of that power is the chief cause of
these
<P 178>
evils and daungers to the King and kingdome. This was the woorke
of this day, and held us without stirring out of the house from
8 this morning till this hower, being now 7 at night; soe that,
it being now high time to goe to dynner, I end the more
abruptly, and rest, 
   Yo=r= La=pp's= all and ever to serve you, 
   T. Meautys.
   The inclosed, for those few words which are in French, and
for which you want noe interpreter, was the King's answer to our
petition; the rest was somewhat which hee spake before and after
the answer given. I heard speech of your purpose to come to
town: if such part of my house as is empty may pleasure you, you
may command it.
   June 11 [\1627\] .

<Q COR 1627 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 178>
[} [\CXIV. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   I have, almost ever since my coming from Culford, been dayly
in journeys, and am, at the writing of thease, soe newly
alighted from my horse, that I have scarse time, considering the
carrier's hower is at hand, to scribble this. I am not a little
compatible with my friends thear to find, by a letter from my
cosin Fred, that my cosin Bacon's health still declines, and
that your La=pp= hath hurt your
<P 179>
foot, which puts you to much payne. Madam, weare I good for any
thing that mought bee of use towards eyther of your recoveries,
I would not fayle to hasten to you and make a tender in person
of my best endeavours and most affectionat service; but, since I
am not, my onely resort must bee with my dayly prayers, upon the
knees of my heart, to the Great Physician Himself. Nevertheless,
I have hearwithall sent some of that syropp of ela campane, of
my sister's making, which I have myself, and some other of my
friends, found so much good of, and have withall sent the
receipt herinclosed by which it is made; and if thear bee any
thing in it hurtful to my cosin's infirmity, yett I am perswaded
it will do your La=pp= good for that rheume whearwith I heard
you complayne you wear troubled a mornings. And by cause I saw
my cosin was allowed to take tobacco somtimes, I, having had
some sent mee from a friend for special good, have hearwithall
likewise sent some porcion of it, and, yf my cosin like it, I
will send him more. Soe, wishing with all my soule a share in
eyther of your sufferings and discomforts of body or mynd, so
that your parts therby might be the more tolerable, I com~end
you to the consolacion and protection of God Almighty, and rest,
   Yo=r= La=pp's= all and ever to love and serve you,
   T. Meautys.
June 22 [\1627\] .
<P 180>
   The Duke, we say, sette sayle on Weddensday, and the King is
expected hear tomorrow. Yt is no newes to you, I conceave, that
Sir Thomas Meautys is father of a brave boy, and that my Lady of
Sussex hath, in congratulacion thearof, descended from her
greatnes, and is like to be well again with him.

<Q COR 1627 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 180>
[} [\CXV. SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Sister,
   I am very sorry to understand by your letter of the death of
my brother, your husband; yet, againe, in the same letter you
did send me a consolation ever to bee rejoysed for, and that is
the peacable, quiet, and relygeous end that he made att his
departure out of this worlde, to tacke possession of that most
blessed inherytance which God hath prepared for all those that
die in His favour. Sister, whereas you wright me in your letter
that he hath left you behind him his widdow, full of greefe and
sorrow, to morne for yourself and not for him, indeed I was glad
to hear you saye soe; for a man to lament the departure of a
freind with extremytie of greefe, when his own eye is a wittnes,
and his hart lykewyse tells him, that his freind hath exchanged
his sosietie for a more happy one, and 
<P 181>
hath left this worlde, soe full of troble and miserye, to goe
tacke possession of a kingdom, the joyes of which are not to be
expressed, that person that shall sorrow soe much for the los of
his freind, certainly he cannot be esteemed a trew freind at
all, for yf a husband shall study to make his wyfe happy, or a
wyfe her husband, all the dayes of their lyfe, after their
departure let them endevor to lyve soe as they may dye the
servants of Almightie God. I have often called to minde a
sayinge of you unto me, which for the pyousnes of it I must
never forget, it being upon the death of your fyrst husband,
when myselfe was with you and saw how exceedingly you greeved
for the los of him; and I well remember that I was a lyttle
mouved at your pacion, to which you replyed, "O brother! you
must holde me excused yf soe be that I greeve for him, but yet
it is not soe much for his death, as for the manner of his
death;" which was a worthy saying, and com~endable in the ears
of all those that ever heard it. But, deere sister, in this your
last husband that feare is tacken awaye and greefe abolyshed,
and joye sent in place of sorrow from God to comfort yourselfe
and all the rest of his freinds left behinde him; and we will
all of us greeve with you, but, as we ought, with a moderate and
discreet greef, for otherwyse we should appear brutal to the
worlde; and surely a sorrow is allowed to every one of us to
sorrow for our freinds
<P 182>
departed. My wyfe desiers to have her love remembered to you,
who is but weake as yet; but my child is, I praise God, helthy
and strong. I am sorry to hear that you should be driven to
tacke up money to serve your present tourne; in what a case then
must your brother bee, in that he hath no rents at all to
reseave. I protest before the Almightie God, that I was never so
neere to bee ruinated and cast under foot as I am at this
present for my company in the Low Countryes, as you may see by
this enclosed letter, which I reseaved not above 10 dayes agoe,
in what case I stand; yet yf I can but goe over now with Lord
Vere, who attends the Dutch Ambassador's retourne, I may speede
reasonably well, yf I had but 100+L to settle my affayres before
my going, and to leave my wyfe provyded for: therfore let me
intreate you imploye your creditt for soe much for me till
Michaelmas, and I will see it discharged without any prejudice
at all to you, for I have 3 or 400+L due unto me in the Low
Countries since my coming from thence, the which I can reseave
no part of it till my owne retourne; and you shall make me very
much your servant.
   Y=r= affectionat brother, T. Meautys.
Clerkenwell, July the 2d, 1627.

<Q COR 1627 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 183>
[} [\CXVI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Sister,
   By this you shall receive an account of the present that you
left with me for the Queene of Bohemia. As soone as she saw me
come into the roome where hir Ma=tie= was, her second words was,
"How dooth my Lady Cornwallis?" I gave her your present, and
told her that I had left you with a hart charged with griefe for
the death of your husband, but with a minde full of will and
reddynes to doe her Majesty service. She tooke the box, and
before all the company that was there did open it, and did very
much commend the property of it, and retourne you many thanks;
for that I saw that it was a gyft very agreeable to her, for the
same day at my Lord Ambassador's howse, where the King and
Queene and Princes of Orange did dyne, she tooke occasion to
speake of it againe, and said that the old love between you two
must not be forgotten. I pray, therefore, continue this
interchange to her as often as you shall find occasion, for,
upon my soul! if it laye in her power to doe you a good office,
she would not be sparing to performe it. She lookes her within
this month or 6 weekes to be brought a bed. God send her a safe
and happy ower, yf it be His 
<P 184>
will! I left a letter with my wyfe, in which I desired you to
lend her 50+L, in regard I left her but ill provided. I pray God
to bles you with His spiritual and temporal blessings; and soe I
rest,
   Y=r= most affect=e= brother and servant,
   T. Meautys.
Hage, July 25, 1627.
   To my deare sister Lady Bacon, at Broome.

<Q COR 1628 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 184>
[} [\CXVII. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best and dearest Lady,
   I receaved yours in answer to myne about the picture, and
having no better way to satisfy the Lord I mentioned, that I had
dealt clearly with him in doing my endeavor, I shewed him so
much of your letter as related thearunto; one passage whearof he
was willing to lay hould of as giving him some kind of hopes
that the picture mought be procured from those hands it was
meant to by your noble husband; and thearfore, yf you please to
lett me know by your next to whose hands it is come, and that I
may likewise understand what is meant by these wordes in your
letter, (^"I thinke they will not part with it upon those termes
would be
<P 185>
pleasing to you,"^) it would enable me to give full satisfaction
to that Lord whether it be to be had on any termes or noe,
whearin he now flatters himselfe with some little hope derived
from those wordes in your foresayd letter. Yt is, I conceave, no
newes to you, that on Friday last we resolved in the howse on
giving the King 5 subsidies, the time not then agreed on, but
the inclinacyon of the howse was to pay them all, or 4 of them,
betweene this and Christmas; since then, which is now some
dayes, we have not spoken a word more of them, but gone on with
our own busines to provide for the liberty of the subject both
in his person and estate, both which have been infringed by the
late busines of the loanes and billeting of souldiers, as is
insisted upon by the howse. The King, taking it in ill part that
we goe not on with the subsidies, requires us to sitt all this
Easter, and not to breake up for a weeke, as we intended, which
men are not pleased withall; and however, in conformity with the
King's message, we shall continue together without adjourning
our howse, yett it is so unwillingly, as that I doubt the King's
busines will hardly gett any steppes forward; which yf the King
find, he is resolved, I perceave by those who know his mind near
hand, to putt us roundly to it by some message to the howse;
which yf it take not effect, which I feare to think of, our
Parlement will not be long lived.
<P 186>
   The enclosed is somewhat that passed from the King and the
Duke at the Counsell table the next day after we resolved to
give the 5 subsidies. I am the shorter in newes, because I
understand by your last that you want not our Parlement newes
from better and readier hands.
   Yo=r= La=pp's= all and ever,
   T. Meautys.
Good Friday [\1628\] .

<Q COR 1628 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 186>
[} [\CXVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever dearest Lady and Cosin,
   In my last to you, which it seemes hath miscarried, I
expressed that my Lord of Dorsettt was the Lord that affected
the picture; and did likewise in that letter bemoane the
sicknes, and desire your prayers for the recovery of my deare
sister Glover, who was then very sick of the small pox, whearof
with eyes fraught with teares of grieffe I must in the first
place acquaint you, she departed this life on this day
fortnight, and yett tell you withall, with eyes noe lesse filled
with teares of joye and comfort, that she hath assuredly changed
this life for a better, and that she is now a saynt in heaven,
<P 187>
witnessed to all that heard her infallibly by those Christian
conflicts and heavenly conferences between God and her soule for
divers dayes together, even to the period of her life ending, in
the unspeakable and lively feeling and assurance of that haven
of eternall happines whearunto she was saylyng. I am, thearfore,
now indeavouring what possibly I may, under so great an
affliction as this is to me, to practise that which I advise
other friends that loved her, namely, to forgett what we have
lost by remembring what she hath gayned. She died at Kellett's,
the apothecarie's, neare Paule's, whear her daughter Anne at
this present lyeth ill of the same disease, but is, God be
thanked! past all daunger and almost able to goe abroad. Yt
rests that, in relation to those of her little wandring flock
she hath left behind her, I make the like suit to your La=p=
that I doe to the rest of my friends, which is, to lend me so
much of their advice and helpe as they can spare me for the
disposing and breeding of some of them; and yf your La=p= can
find in your harte to ease me somewhat, without charge to you at
all, of the care of breeding that little harmlesse one which was
dear to her, and is no less soe to me, and ever was, the rather
peradventure because she hath in favour been sayd and believed
to resemble you, I shall be at some harte's ease, which at this
time I have neede of, being like one that hath lost a 
<P 188>
wife as well as a deare sister, finding the difference now for a
moneth together between solitude and the conversacyon and
comfort of a matchless friend; and wear it not for the relief I
have found from some disconsolate howers by the neighbourhood
and noble favors of my Lord and Lady Cleveland, of whose family
I reckon myself, and have done all this while, thear being
nothing but solitude under my own roofe, I should by this time
have resolved to become as weary of this part of the world as
some friends alive, nearest and dearest unto me, have shewed of
late to be of me. I receaved letters this morning from Sir
Thomas Meautys, dated the 25th of March: he and his lady are
both well, and she ready to make worke for the midwife about the
end of July next as she writes, and hath invited me to come over
and christen her childe; whearof I can yett retourne noe direct
answer untill I have settled some tearme busines concerning my
Lord S=t= Albane's creditors, and taken order for the disposing
of some of my sister's children, and seeing to the maintenance,
which is 100+L, and amongst them, left in trust with me and my
eldest brother for their educacyon. However, against that time
lett me bespeake your letters into those parts, for rather your
brother in some letters to me complaines of being so unhappy as
not to have receaved any letters lately from you. And now, my
best and dearest friend, I take leave to kisse
<P 189>
your pretious hands, and to wish from the bottom of my soul all
true happines and blisse both in this life and a better to you
and all yours, whom I doe most sincerely and entirely love;
resolving, in what part of the world soever it shall please God
to dispose me, to live and dye
   All and ever yo=r= La=pp's=,
   T. Meautys.
Apr=ll= 16=th= [\1628\] .
   The L=ds= of the upper howse are this day in serious debate,
which hath held them some days together, whether they shall
joyne with us to the King in that part of our petition for the
restrayning of the King's power of com~itment in all cases
without shewing cause upon the com~itment. Yf they joyne, all
will end well; otherwise we are like to break within very few
dayes. 

<Q COR 1628 EBACON>
<A EDMUND BACON>
<G M>
<P 189>
[} [\CXIX. SIR EDMUND BACON TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sister,
   I had a purpose to have seene you in the ende of this weeke;
but, finding a disposition to the goute, I have bene driven to
take physike these 4 days by way of prevention. This I hope
shall excuse me to you, who am goinge towards London, God
willinge, the day after the fast; where, yf yt
<P 190>
shall please you to com~ande me any thing, I shall be ready to
serve you. In the mean tyme I entreat you that M=r= Fenne may
come to me, for I can now give him satisfaction concerninge the
lyvery, M=r= Barrie having bene here with me to that purpose. Yt
will be necessarye that the inventory of my father's goods be at
London; yf you will sende yt to me, I will carrye yt; or
otherwise I desyre you yt may be there. I hope all thinges will
be in so good a forwardnes that the next tearme shall dispach
the busynes, of which I immagine you thinke I am by this tyme
wearye. And thus I rest,
   Y=r= lovinge brother, ready to doe you service,
   Ed. Bacon.
   There are thankes to be given under my hande for the best and
fattest pike that ever was eaten: he had a fish hooke in the
fatt on y=e= outside of his rivett.
Redgrave, this 19 of April 1628.

<Q COR 1628 EBACON>
<A EDMUND BACON>
<G M>
<P 190>
[} [\CXX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^EDMUND BACON TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sister,
   I being to pay much money into the Exchequer for the debt of
my father to the K., I am tould I am like to be releived out of
the estate my father left, eyther personal or his lands
disposed. The distribution
<P 191>
of the charge must be ordered by the Barons of the Exchequer,
from whence this morning I was delivered a subpoena to be sent
unto you that there might be cleere dealings amongst us. I have
acquainted M=r= Morse this morning how the proceedings in the
business are like to be, and withall I have tould him that in
all the wayes I shall proceed no otherwise then as I shall be
willing to declare myselfe to any man of judgment. These shall
be presently speedily sent to my brothers to make answere for
what concernes them. I am glad to hear this morning that Nicke
begins to recover.
   Your very loveing brother,
   Ed. Bacon.
Rowlls, this 14 of May 1628.

<Q COR 1628 JCORNWALLIS>
<A JANE CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 191>
[} [\CXXI. JANE LADY BACON TO SIR EDMUND BACON.\] }] 
Brother,
   I received your letter with your unkind token, which I think
I did not deserve, I haveing been as forward, if not forwarder,
to a peacable end then any body els; but since you have made
choice of this way to walk in, I will go with you along upon as
faire and frendly tearmes as you will; and rest, 
   Yo=r= very loveing sister,
   Ja. Bacon.
[\May 1628.\]

<Q COR 1628 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 192>
[} [\CXXII. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My best Lady and Cosin,
   I have found even minutes enough, and that's all, between the
Parlament howse and the Consell chamber to scribble over these
confused lines, and to tell you what hath passed in Parlament,
viz. almost a moneth; for onely time, and not busines, hath
hetherto passed. Tomorrow Sir Ed. Cooke's election will be
determined of, and it is taken for graunted he will be excluded
and another chosen in his roome. The counsell of warre, as well
such of them as are of the upper howse as the rest, are tomorrow
to appear in the lower howse, and to answere to such questions
as shall thear be asked them touching the yssuing and expending
of the late subsidies. The lower howse hath busied themselves
most part of this weeke in examining the stay of a French shipp
hear, laden with merchandise of the valew of 400,000+L, which
stay hath caused an arest of all our merchants' goods in
Fraunce, to the valew of above 300,000+L. The stay of that shipp
having produced this ill effect, it hath heated the howse
against those who made the seazure therof, which is found to be
the Lo. Admirall; whearupon a message was this daye sent to him
from our howse to demaund his reason of that stay, with a
purpose, in case he gives us not
<P 193>
the better satisfaction, to present it up to the King as a
publique greevance; the yssue whearof can proove nothing but the
loozing our breath and the shewing of our good wills to the
Duke, for he will easily answer it to the King and upper howse
though we be deaf to him. Pray, Madam, lett me understand in
your next of my cosin's safe and healthfull arrival at Broome,
and in the mean time present him with the best affections of
   His and yours to serve you ever,
   T. Meautys.
   The Earl of Devonsheere is dead.
[\June 21, 1628.\]
   Pray direct your letters to Kellett's the apothecary, on
Ludgate Hill.

<Q COR 1628 EBACON>
<A EDMUND BACON>
<G M>
<P 193>
[} [\CXXIII. SIR EDMUND BACON TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sister,
   I make no doute but M=r= Morse hath tolde you in what
forwardnes I was towards a composition at his beinge at London,
which since I have perfected; and though yt be a good sum of
monye, 3100+L, yet, all things considered, I complayne not of
the bargaine. To conclude, the next tearme ther was proces
appointed to be sent downe
<P 194>
to the shreyfe, to charge those in possession of my father's
landes to make awnsweare why they should not be chargable to the
debt to the K., and that the conveyances of the landes should be
brought up. I was bolde, without your privitye, to stay the
proces concerning you, as I did the rest for my brothers, by
engaging myselfe to awnsweare for them. Yf you like of the same
course, I will retourne your awnsweare. Yf you shall be pleased
to have one at London some 5 days before the tearme, with the
conveyance made to my brother upon your marriage, as also that
which concernes the stock, I must certifye M=r= Vernon by the
carriers that goe from Bury the next week what you will doe, and
so desyre you to let me understande y=r= resoluc~on by Sunday
night at the furthest. 
   My brother's monument goeth well forwarde; I sawe yt, so much
as ys done, the day before I came out of towne. And yesterday,
betwixt this & Burye, Tom Shorte tolde me the good nues that my
nephewe Nick growes strong, which I am hartely glad of.
   Your very lovinge brother to serve you,
   Ed. I. Bacon.
[\June 1628.\]

<Q COR 1628 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 195>
[} [\CXXIV. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best and dearest Lady, 
   As thear is nothing more naturall with me then to be best
pleased when I am doing you servise, soe be pleased to believe
that thear hath nothing since I saw you occurred oftener to my
thoughts and wishes then the hope of seeing and serving yours
ere long. I write thease from Hampton Court, wheare the King and
Queene intend to stay till Alhollandtide, and whear I am afrayd
I shall be for the most part attending; and thearfore, yf that
part of my house which is at my own disposing, and which, by
making up of doors and passages, is sequestered intirely from
that part my Lo. of Cleveland hath, may pleasure you, you may
com~and it, wholly furnished as it is; and, when I retourne to
it againe, I shall love every roome the better whearin I shall
conceave you have eyther trodde or breathed. All this without
courtshippe, as is and shall be for ever whatsoever else lyeth
within the power which may be acceptable unto you of
   Yo=r= La=pp's= all and ever to love and serve you,
   T. Meautys.
   The Parlament is adjourned till the 20=th= of January, and a
proclamacyon going out to that effect. Thear is nothing certaine
of the fleete, other then 
<P 196>
that on Monday was se'nnight they wear seene within some few
leagues of the Isle of Retz, coming so late as, it seemes, to
take advantage of the late spring tides, and expecting till the
oportunity of the next, which by the seamen's calculacyon begun
yesterday. My Lo. Brooke departed this life on Tuesday morning.
October 2, 1628.
   Pray, Madam, kisse M=rs= Randolph for me, and injoyne her to
do the like for me to all my cosins, exsept Sir Frederick. 

<Q COR 1628 ARANDOLPH>
<A AMBROSE RANDOLPH>
<G M>
<P 196>
[} [\CXXV. AMBROSE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Most hon=rd= Lady,
   Upon Munday last I received 15+L of M=r= Morse and gave him
an acquittance for it, and imediatly payed it to M=rs= Burnibie
and had her discharge. I have also sent your letter to Sir T.
Meautys; and can assure you that M=rs= Glover had your letter
long sinse, but I left her sick, which may be the cause you hear
not from her. The Lady Barrington, and y=e= Lady Crofts that
shall be the next week,
<P 197>
present again their service to you=r= La=sp=, whose
neighbourhood was a great advancement to the match, as they
confesseth. From beyond sea we only heare that the Sweths and
the French King are united, and their articles agreed upon. Here
at home Sir John Suckling, in place of repairing his honor, hath
lost his reputation for ever, and drawne himself in dainger of
the law. On Tuesday last he waie layed M=r= Digby, that had
formerly strook him, and, as he came from the play, he, with
many more, set upon M=r= Digby; in which quarell Sir John
Suckling had a man rune through, som say he is dead. The King
goeth this day, being Friday, to Cobam, where the Duke festes
him this night; then he comes hether again, wher I remain,
   Yo=r= La=p's= most affectionat kinsman to serve you and
yours,
   Ambr. Randolph.
21 of Novembr. [\1628\] .

<Q COR 1629 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 199>
[} [\CXXVII. T. MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My noble Lady and Cosin,
   Yf it weare as easy for me to passe through Suffolk without
asking leave to salute you and to inquire of your welfare, as it
is for you to deny me leave, I had peradventure forborne to put
upon you at this time the trouble of reading thease; but by
cause, be you what you please towards me, I can be no other in
my heart towards you then what, upon best understandings
formerly between us as friends, we have formerly professed, you
may please to pardon me yf upon that foundacyon, which on my
part was layd too deep to be shaken with every tempest of
unkindnes, much lesse with one guste of breath, I take leave to
build agayne some lower roomes for myself in your accustomed
friendly and much desired affections. And yf I may be soe happy
as to perceave, upon the retourne of this bearer, that the
porter at Broome hath not in charge to shutte the gates
<P 200>
against me when I come thither, I shall peradventure sett apart
one hower before I retourne to London to waite on you and kisse
your hands, then which nothing, since I had the favor to doe it
last, hath occurred more acceptable, or is more longed for by
   Yo=r= La=pp's= for ever to love and serve you,
   T. Meautys.
Norfolke, Armingland, May 25, 1629.

<Q COR 1629 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 200>
[} [\CXXVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   I am not a little troubled that I have heard nothing since my
departure from Broome concerning your health, though I had my
cosin Randolph's promise, and partly yours, that I should. I was
severall times at my Lady Nethersole's lodging to have delivered
your letter with my own hands, but, not finding her within, I
sent it her at length by my man Matthewe, who was intrusted to
give her an account of your present health, and of the circuit
that letter had rode before it came to her hands. She tould my
man shee would this day write to you and send the letter to mee;
but I hear nothing of it, and thearfore I conceave shee may have
found some readyer way to convey it to your hands. The inclosed,
from your brother came to
<P 201>
my hands some dayes since; whearin by cause to hear somthing
concerning his child, I thought it not unreasonable to impart it
to you. Onely, yf in any letter to him you reply to any thing
contayned in this of his to mee, you may bee pleased not to
acknowledge that I transmitted to you the whole letter. That Sir
Thomas Edmonds goes ambassador for Fraunce, I think, is noe
newes. The Queene comes abroad on Sunday next, and hath been so
well, beyond expectacion, all the time of her lying-in, as that
it was a second labor to her to keep in all this time. You will,
peradventure, hear speach of an ambassador arrived here from the
Arch Duchesse, but it is onely Reubens, the famous painter,
appearing onely in his own quality; and Jerbir, the Duke's
painter, master of the ceremonies to entertaine him. My Lady
Barrington injoyned mee last night not to omitt her servise to
you; and I should say as much for her to my cosin Randolph, but
that I owe her not soe much service, for fayling of her promise
in giving mee an account this weeke of your La=pp's= health,
then which nothing in the world can bee more welcome to Yo=r=
La=pp's= all and ever to love and serve you,
   T. Meautys. 
June [\1629.\]

<Q COR 1629 BLONG>
<A BRIDGET LONG>
<G M>
<P 202>
[} [\CXXIX. BRIDGET LONG TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Good Madam, 
   I haue lately receeved both the letters you sent me, and
yo=r= letter that is directed to my Lady Meautys, w=ch= about a
fortnight hence I will most carefully send to Forneham by the
foote post that lately came to me from her, and will call on me
before he retorne. I also lately received a letter from M=rs=
Suzanna, my Ladie's sister, w=ch= I make bold herewith to send
yo=r= La=p=, that you maye thereby take notice of the death of
Sir Richard Burnaby, as also that you may truely knowe what
intentions are towardes the poore childe on that syde; butt I
leaue the consideration therof to yo=r= La=p's= wisedome, for I
do this onely of my owne heade, and yo=r= La=p= may doe as you
please for all me: butt truely itt is high tyme the childe were
nowe taken into some better keepinge, for albeitt the nurse doth
her parte to the vttmost, yett he nowe beginnes to growe, and
will looke for better com~ons then her wages will beare. I sente
for him and he was w=th= me a fortnight att Whitsontyde last,
and I perceiued how well a little tyme of chaunge did alter him:
he is very well (I thanke God) and comes on apace; he can goe
and prattle a little, 
<P 203>
and is very pretty companye, and thrives the better for his good
aunte Bacon's allowance, w=ch= is weekely sent his nurse for
him. And thus, good Madam, I am redy to serue you, if in any
thinge you haue occasion to comaund me: in the meane tyme I doe
humbly take my leaue.
   Yo=r= La=p's= to be comaunded,
   Bridgett Longe.
This 17=th= of June 1629.
   To the righte worthye and my much honored good ladye, the
Ladye Bacon, att her house in Suffolke, &c. &c.
   M=r= Longe remembers his humble seruice vnto you.

<Q COR 1629 DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 203>
[} [\CXXX. DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady and dearest Frend, 
   I retorne you humble thankes for your coach, which brought us
well to Coulchester, where I met M=r= Randolph with another, but
not one that will bring us to London before Saturday night. I
perseave nothing by him that should cause my stay in London
longer then to see my mother and doe my duty to her, for she
finds good frends to helpe her to money out of the Exchequer,
and that is all she is like to expect, he tells me; yet I am
resolved to trie what may be done for her, and then make hast to
kiss your hands at Brome again, which I hope to doe within a
fortnight or three weekes.
<P 204>
My father, to my great joye, made his last actions sutable to
his former, which was, he did his indevor to sell his offis,
which was made over to M=r= Randolph before, and came so neer it
as the man was in the howse with money to paie for it, when at
the instant he failed of words and breath, soe nothing was done.
If M=r= Randolph had not gone as he did, it seemes he had lost
his offis; for my Lord Carlisle com~ended one to the King, which
he apointed to posses my father's plase, M=r= Randolph being
such a stranger as I think they knew not what right he had to
it; but now they are perswaded to let the man paie for it and be
his partner, and reseave half the benefit, which he might have
possesed alone had he not neglected it, as he doth all things;
but he seemes glad ther is one to do the busines for him, that
he may live like a drone as he did.
   I am your most true harted cosin and humblest servant,
   Dorothe Randolph.
[\1629.\]

<Q COR 1629 DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 204>
[} [\CXXXI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   My desires and intentions have bene to have waighted on you
long agoe, for I thought my
<P 205>
mother and her busines would have liene better settled sooner;
but all things are yet as they weare, and nothing to be done
about her money till the King come, and till she know what to
trust to: so she will by noe means let me leave her.
   I have no hope of seeing your Ladyship suddenly, except some
good occasion bring you to towne. Sir William Plaiter will
acquaint you with the busines of my Lord Banning's daughters,
which we thinke very good marages, and not hard to be gotten by
you, because you have a great many frends to make way for you,
as my Lord of Dorsett and Sir Henry German, that are nere
kinsmen to them. Sir Harbottle Grimston hath a
<P 206>
greate deale of interest there, and will be as redee to do you
servis as any bodie. Thar is a report my Lord of Dorchester
shall marry the widow; which if he doe, you will be still the
stronger. If this or any thing else perswade you to come to
towne, I think you cannot be better lodged any whear then heare
with this woman; and you may sojorn with her, or she will
provide you diet. She hath made a fine lodging of the parler and
furnished it daintily, which you may have, and that within it,
and the romes over where you lay before; but they will not be
long unlet, for theare is many desires them; but, if I can
possibly, I will make a stay of them till I hear from you; till
which time, and ever, I will be
   Y=r= Ladyship's most faythfull frend and humble servant,
   Dorothe Randolph. 
[\1629.\]
   My mother presents her humble servis to your Ladyship; so
doth M=r= Randolph, whoe is in danger
<P 207>
to become a statesman, for he will not spare any frend or
occasion one hower from his offis. I am promised to speake with
a very good cooke, that served in a Lord's house ayght yeares.

<Q COR 1629? DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 207>
[} [\CXXXII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   I am now, I thanke God, soe well rid of my paine that I am
able to give you an acount at larg of all the busines you wright
about; which I had done sooner, but that I reseaved not your
letter, which I imagine should have come on Wednesday or
Thursday, as they use to doe. I went sins to visit M=rs=
Dickson, and in discors fell upon the ould busines; but she made
answer ther was no good to be done for the two elder daughters,
ther was now a treaty of marage betwene my Lord North's sone for
one, and Sir Gervis Clifton's for
<P 208>
another, and the third was too young. I spake with M=r= Chitting
about Sir Thomas Barrington's neese; he semes to thinke she is
worth seven thousand pounds, but he will wright to you the
perticulers. But I beleve my inteligens will prove better then
his, for my Lady Barrington, who is now in town, and presents
her most afectionat servis to you, tould me M=r= Chitting had
some speach with her concerning the gentlewoman, and would have
had her wright to you about it; to which she made answer she
would not propound it to you, but, if upon her informacion you
toke liking to it, she would be redy to do you any servis, and
would show how glad she would be that any that had relation to
her might be soe happy as to come under your government. I asked
her what her portion was: she tould me she had one thousand
pounds in money and a hundred pounds a year land of inheritans,
and they valued this at five thousand pounds or therabouts. I
made answer; I had not heard any thing of it from you, but I
thought you would not aksept of soe small a portion with any
body; besides, you would rather have money then land: but this I
said from myself. You may give what answer you please, and, if
you like not of it, you need retorne noe answer to M=r= Chitting
for I have putt off my Lady Barrington from any hope of it;
tharfore, if pleas you, let M=r= Chitting say nothing that he
hath acquainted you
<P 209>
with it, becaus I think you will denie it, and I would have
nothing hinder the proseding of a busines which I have some hope
may come to good, which is this: As I was with my Lady
Barrington, ther came in Sir William Curtene, a Dutchman, and
two of his daughters, the one of which was soe conveniently
handsome that I wished her my cosin's wife if shee had ten
thousand pounds; to which Lady Barrington answered, they were
reported to have so much a piece, and ther father might give
them more if he liked the condicions, for he is very rich. I
asked the lady if shee had so much intrest in them as to
propound such a business with hope of suckses, and whether she
would be pleased to favor her frends soe much as to doe it: to
which she answered, she had some power ther, and would use her
best endeavors if she might reseave full com~ition from me,
which I must first reseave from you, and so will prosede by your
direction. Now, to give you some acount of your frends and
servants here, of which my mother is one that retornes you many
thankes for your kind wishes to her and her busines, in which
yet
<P 210>
we can do nothing. The letter you sent my cosin Meautys was
unsealed. You sent three open, one to him, one to Sir William
Plaiters, and one to me; but I delivered them to them both with
my own hands, and I think they both beleved I looked not in
them; for, if I did not, my cosin was very testy at the
reseaving of it, which had I known I would have sealed it for
him. I think he meanes to come quarrell with you for it if he
can find noe greater matter, for he intends to come to you as
soon as the tearme is done. Sir William Plaiters is in this
towne, and hath bene ever sins he came from you, but he hath.
bene ill of late with soare eyes. And now my paper reminds me I
have bine so teadious to you, and bids me say noe more but that
I am
   Your most loving, faithfull, & humble servant,
   Dorothe Randolph.

<Q COR 1629 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 210>
[} [\CXXXIII. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   At my coming to London on Weddensday last, and not before, I
understood of yo=r= La=pp's= being at Coventry by M=r=
Greenhill, whoe telling me he had letters to convey to you, I
purposing at that time, and having oportunity, to send to my
Lord of 
<P 211>
Dunsmore's, not farre from thence, gladly tooke upon me, and
bespoke of him, the truste of conveying them unto you, the
rather that I moughte thearby be occasioned to attend upon them
with a letter of my owne, making tender of my accustomed
profession to love and serve you and yours with the most sincere
and unchangeable affections of a friend and kinsman, and of my
desires to receave and doe your com~andments with as much gust
and appetite as that whearwith I feede upon my dayly bread.
Next, I take leave to congratulate with yo=r= La=pp= and my
exc=lent= good aunt your noble mother the happy and, as I can
witnesse on both partes, the long looked for hower that hath
brought you together, and the many howers of joye and content
which dayly accompany soe happy a meeting; only, I confesse I am
not without some regrette that, eyther by yo=r= La=pp's=
election or my misfortune, it falls out at such a time when I am
not soe much at liberty, as yo=r= La=pp= well knows, nor soe
much master of myself, as to waite upon you thear, as I professe
I did infinitely desire to have done, and had not failed to doe
at any other time which I mought call my owne. For newes, I
meete with little hear, other then that
<P 212>
the Spanish embassador, Don Carlos de Colona, who was formerly
hear, is so near his arrivall as that thear is a howse in Broad
Street already prepared to receave him; and Sir Francis
Cottington, we say, goes for Spayne some time next weeke. You
may, peradventure, have heard a rumour of some sharpe encounter
betweene the Prince of Orange and Vanderburgh's army, and of
blood drawn deeply betweene them, but the receaved opinion hear
is that thear is no such thing. The King goes on Weddensday next
to More Park, whear he stayes till Friday, hunts and feasts.
Soe, asking leave for thease to kiss your hands, together with
my worthy aunt's, and the rest of my best and dearest cosins
under that roofe, especially those of my pretious cosin Anne at
the least thrice over for the bracelett that goes thrice about,
   I rest, yo=r= La=pp's= all & ever, 
   T. Meautys.
Hampton Court, Oct=r= 2, 1629.
   To Lady Bacon, at Coventry.

<Q COR 1629 DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 213>
[} [\CXXXIV. DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   There was one question my Lady Barrington asked me when she
was in towne that I would desire to be provided of answer from
you for her against she come. She desired to know, if Sir
William Curteen asked what portion you would demand, what she
should say. We looke for her every day; and my cosin Meautys's
man put me in hope I should see you here between this and
Easter, which was very welcome newes to me. I have enquired
after matches in other places if this should faile, but can hear
of none but some of the nobility, which I harkened not to,
becaus I thinke you desire not to match with them; yet thear was
one Lord whoes daughters weare so much co~mended to me that I
did not absolutely denie it, but thought good to let you know.
It is my Lord of Bridgwater; and Sir Henry St. George is he
propounded it, whoe is well acquainted with him, and thinkes he
will give six thousand pounds.
<P 214>
When you come I hope you will met with one to your liking, which
I hope will be shortly; till which time, and ever, I am and will
be
   Your humble servant,
   Dorothe Randolph.
[\1629.\]

<Q COR 1629 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 216>
[} [\CXXXVI. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My noble Lady and Cosin,
   I cannot tell what to conceaue of it that I haue neuer a
friend left at Broome that will vouchsafe mee a lyne or two
touching the state of yo=r= health, w=ch= is soe pretious vnto
mee, and the recouery wherof I soe affectionatly long for. I
wrote to yo=r= La=pp= the last weeke, and sent it inclosed in
one to S=r= Fredrick. I mett w=th= M=r= Long, whoe tould mee
that S=r= Rich. Burnaby was dead, and that the Lady would now
take home yo=r= godsonne into hir care; but that, this beeing
but discourse as yett, when it grewe to bee resolued on hee
woulde advertize yo=u= therof by letter. Yt is currantly
reported that both Colonell Morgan and the King of Sweeden haue
giuen a blowe of noe small consequence in seuerall places to the
Empero=r's= forces; this I had more perticularly from S=r= James
Fullerton yesterday, at dynner, at my Lord of Cleueland's. I
rest,
   Yo=r= La=pp's= for euer to loue and serue you,
T. M.
[\Nov=r= 1629.\]

<Q COR 1629 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 217>
[} [\CXXXVII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best and deerest Lady,
   Yt is harder, I perceave, to gett an invitacion from your
La=pp= then a welcome; witness your last, which turned the
invitacion I bespoke in myne into an expostulacyon, not invited
or drawn on by any thing in my letter to your La=pp=, rightly or
friendly interpreted. But letting that passe as you please to
understand it, I come now to tell you somewhat of what we doe
hear. In my last I tould you of the restraint of some noblemen
and others about a discourse of a pernicious nature that had
passed from hand to hand, teaching a king by the examples of
forraine tiranyes to oppresse his subjects, and to rayse moneyes
without parlaments. This being conceaved to be a malevolent
devise of some ill affected persons to putt envy upon the King
and state in a time when sinister impressions are easily
entertayned, as yf the King intended to goe those wayes, hath
caused a proceeding in Star Chamber against those Lords and
others, whoe are now at liberty to follow theyr cause, and are
ready to putt in theyr answers. On Monday the King feasted the
Queene, and solemnized hir birthday with running at ring and
other triumphs. Yesterday
<P 218>
being the King's birthday, the K. feasted him againe at Denmarke
House. The last weeke, my Lady Cooke's eldest daughter married,
much to her mother's discomfort, to Nedde Sidnam, formerly the
King's page, now equery. They wear married in Whitehall; and my
Lord of Holland and my Lord Goring wear, by the King and
Queene's appointment, present at it. Thear hath been much
courting the Lady Cooke sinse, with promises from the King to
make Sidnam a fortune woorthy hir daughter: last night my Lord
of Holland brought hir some fruit therof, viz. a graunt of 600+L
a year fee farm for both theyr lives, and an assurance of a
present of 600+L woorth of juells from the Queene.
   Y=r= La=pp's= all and ever, T. M.
   Yt beginnes to be currently spoken and believed that the
Queene is with childe.
[\Nov=r=. 20, 1629.\]

<Q COR 1629 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 218>
[} [\CXXXVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^THOMAS MEAUTYS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   My last to your La=pp=, being rightly interpreted, was rather
a bemoaning of my owne misfortune then reproving another's
faulte. This comes to
<P 219>
give you thankes that you have at length been pleased to impart
soe much of your minde to mee as gives mee ayme whear to find
you when I shall bee at liberty to waite on you, whearin if I
fayle toward the end of the terme, I shall indeed reckon it
among my misfortunes, though your La=pp= peradventure place it
among my faultes; neyther will I then, or at any time doubt of
my welcome, though I meet with nothing in any of your letters
like an invitation, and though, comparing them with letters from
other friends to whom I am less professed, full of invitations,
they seeme to speake colder then they meane, and mought somtimes
a little trouble mee did I not conclude that it wear alike
erroneous to judge of the store and inside of your affections
and cordialnes to your friend by the outside of your
expressions, as to judge of the stores of a rich goldsmith or
jeweller by that onely which appeares upon his stall toward the
streete. And now, my dearest Cosin and friend, fearing to renew
those paines of your head by the reading of thease, which wear
soe troublesome to you at the writing of your last, I forbear to
say for the present any thing else in thease then what my heart
now and at all times inforceth mee to say, namely, that I am
really all and ever
   Your La=pp's= to serve you, T. M.
November [\1629\] .
<P 220>
   You may peradventure hear of commitments of my Lo. of Clare
to the B=p= of Winchester, my Lo. of Somersett to the B=p= of
London, my Lo. of Bedford to the M=r= of the Roules, Sir Rob.
Cotton and one M=r= S=t= John, a lawyer, to other places, which
is all true; the cause not yett apparent, voyced generally to
bee for some writing or discourse passed from hand to hand,
counterprerogative and seditious, now discovered. Our Parlement
men shall, they say, be proceeded with speedily upon an
informacion in the King's Bench.
   For yo=r= hon=d= self, deere Madam.

<Q COR 1629 DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 220>
[} [\CXXXIX. DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   When I resaued your letter on Thursday, that I might giue you
the better acount of the busines, I went to deliuer my Lady
Barrington's letter my selfe, whome I could not meete with at
home, but found her at a ladie's, wheare thare was soe much
<P 221>
company I could not speake with her as I desired; but I find by
her shee meanes to doe you the best seruis she can in that
busines. She intends to speake with S=r= William Curtene
spedily, and to wright you word how she prosedes; and, becaues
she goeth out of toune shortly, I desired her, if she found the
father forward in the busines, shee would let him know in her
absens I could informe him of any thing, or M=r= Randolph, if
she thought him fitter; to which shee made answer she would
study the best way, for shee did not more truly desire to serue
any body. Shee cometh to toune againe the next tearme, and then
I hope what is now begune will then hapily be ended, for which I
shall be as truly glad as if it conserned my selfe. I doubt not
but S=r= Fredrick and S=r= William Plaiters are long before this
safely with you, and that my cosen will stay theare till some
good ocasion bring you to toune; which I hope will be shortly,
for, sins my mother's ocasions denies me yet the coming to you,
I will pleaes my selfe with an expectation of seeing you heare,
and will be heare and euery wheare 
   Euer your faithfull and humble seruant,
   Dorothe Randolph.
London, this 1st of Desember [\1629\] .
   My mother presents her seruis to your Ladeship, and is yet
not gone one step forward in her busines, but rests at my Lord
Treasoror's unmersifull mercy.

<Q COR 1629 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 222>
[} [\CXL. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My euer best and dearest Lady,
   I receaued by this messenger, a seruant of my brother
Claxton's, an earnest sumons to come to Liueremore vpon the
death of the ould man, whearof they aduertized mee, pretending
it concerned them to haue a friend at hand to aduize w=th=all as
things now stand; but, it soe falling out that I must
necessarily bee at London on Weddensday next at the furdest, I
haue ouerruled my self and my desires, (though not w=th=out some
difficulty,) considering that Culford is in my way to Liuermore,
in taking a journey to gratify my friends thear, and hope it may
suffize for theyr affayres to recomend to S=r= Drue (w=ch= I
haue doon by letter) the care of them as there shall bee
occasion, desiring yo=r= La=pp=, when yo=u= see him next, to
second my recomendacon thearin by the power yo=u= haue ouer him.
I comend yo=r= La=pp=, and all yo=rs=, my dear and precious
cosins, to God's goodnes and protection, and remayne noe lesse
by affections then by obligac~ons Yo=r= La=pp's= all and euer,
   T. Meautys.
Toddington, this 7th of Decem=br= [\1629\] .
   For yo=r= dearest self.

<Q COR 1629 DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 224>
[} [\CXLII. DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   The Lady Barrington made soe short a stay in London after the
receipt of your letter, that shee could doe littell in the
busines: what shee did I hope she hath or will shortly let you
know, yet I thought fitt to tell you what I know conserning it
from her. Shee went to the father and tould him that out of her
loue to him, and the good opinion she had of his daughter, she
came to propound a worthy match to him for her, which she knew
he would giue her thanckes for, when he knew wher it was; which
before he should doe, she desired to know if she weare free, or
he had noe treaty with any for her, to which he replied, he
could not yet giue her any answer, but retorned her many thankes
for her offer, though I thinke he knew not whoe it was she
wished him. She is extreame sory she could doe noe more in it
now; but at the next tearme she will be heare againe and then
shee tould me she would doe you the best seruis she could: in
the meane time, if I heare of any other, I
<P 225>
will lett you know of it, for I doe most ernestly desire to se
him maried, becaues I persaued a wandring humor in him when he
was at London, and a resolution this spring to goe into France,
yet not without your leaue, as he saied. I resaued this muff
from my cosen Copinger latly, and, sins you weare pleased to
like the other that came from thens, I venture to present this
to you, and with it the best seruis of 
   Your most louing, faithfull, and humbell seruant, 
   Dorothe Randolph. 
Desember 7 [\1629.\]

<Q COR 1630? DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 225>
[} [\CXLIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   I much wonder the Lady Barrington reseaved so drie an answer
from Curtene, for shee was very confident it would have bene
thankfully entertained, and that an extraordinary portion would
have bene given, because shee knew he gave five thousand pounds
with a daughter to one that had 
<P 226>
but twelve hundred pounds a year, and shee thought he would give
ratably according to the estate: but this is the cause, I
perseave, why he makes a stay; he hath a brother latly dead in
the Low Contryes, and his sone is gone thither to see how things
are, and till his retorne he will conclude of nothing, for it is
reported he hath left him forty or fifty thousand pounds, and
then he will looke very hie for his daughters; yet Lady
Barrington said he gave her many thankes and did not at all
refues, but made a stay; but it is not worth your further
expectation. I hope a better will come in your way in the meane
time; and, if a good offer comes, I presume you will not delay
it, for it is hard to meet with one whose person and portion is
without exseption. If some such good occasion bring you not to
town, I intend, if pleas God to give me leave, to waight on you
at Culford between this and Easter ...
   Your most faithful and humble servant,
   Dorothe Randolph.
[\1629-30.\]
   To my most honored frend the Lady Bacon, at her howes at
Culford, present this.

<Q COR 1630? DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 226>
[} [\CXLIV. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   I am most hartely sorry to heare you are soe ill as your
letter tells me, which I reseaved with the
<P 227>
dainty pott of jely, for which, as for the rest of your favors,
I can only retorne thankes and continue constantly yours. I sent
a letter to you last weeke, fastened to a little box, which I
make question whether you reseaved or noe, becaus I heard
nothing. Ther was some busines concerning my Lady Barrington,
who will be in towne by the time this letter come to you; and I
know not whether your resolution hould conserning the match she
propounded or noe, and I am suer she will aske me whether she
shall prosede in it, which I will say nothing to till I hear
from you. I heare of a very prety gentillwoman that hath six
hundred pounds a year, and her father and mother dead; but ther
is eighteen hundred pounds to be paid to her grandmother for her
wardship, some of it. If you like of this, I think ther might be
meanes found to propound it. M=r= Randolph went to see her, and
com~ends her for very hansome, and sixteen years ould. My mother
is very ill with the gout, I am afraid I shall not enjoy her
long. Thus, with my faithful love recommended to you, I rest,
   Your Ladyship's humble serv=t=,
   Dorothe Randolph.
[\1629-30.\]
   To my most honored frend the Lady Bacon, Culford.

<Q COR 1630 T2MEAUTYS>
<A THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 228>
[} [\CXLV. THOMAS MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My ever best Lady and Cosin,
   I rejoyse to perceave by your last that you are journey
proofe, it giving us hope hear that we may ere long see you at
London, whearof when you shall vouchafe to give me light, or
think me worthy the knowledge, I shall as gladly waite on you
part of the way, as be ready to serve you while I remayne hear,
or while I remayne in this world, and that with those affections
whearwith I have long since vowed myself
   Yo=r= La=pp's= all and ever to serve you and yours,
   T. Meautys.
Feb=ry= 19 [\1629-30\] .
   Madam, I gladly kissed the outside as well as the inside of
your letter, as supposing the superscription to be my cosin
Anne's handwriting. If I wear mistaken, lett the next make me
amends, or ells she is still in my debt for the well meaning of
it.

<Q COR 1630 BLONG>
<A BRIDGET LONG>
<G M>
<P 228>
[} [\CXLVI. BRIDGET LONG TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Good Madam,
   Havinge lately received letters from Sir Thomas Meautys
touchinge his little sonne, that eyther yo=r= La=p= will take
him into yo=r= care, or els that he be
<P 229>
sent over to him, as also that a some of 8=li= of his, w=ch=
fell out to remaine in M=r= Longe's handes & was kept for the
vse of the nurse, shold be deliuered to this bearer, his
sergeaunt, I haue thought itt my parte, in discharge of that
that I do and haue vndertaken for the childe, to move yo=r=
La=p= y=t= you wold please (if itt may stand w=ch= yo=r=
lykeinge) to take the childe to yo=r= custody, or if there be,
as p~adventure there may be, some raason why you shold not, then
to give yo=r= advice what shalbe done w=th= itt, for I will haue
no hande in sendinge itt to sea, where I dare not goe my self;
and that whereas about Michellmas last yo=r= La=p= sent me 5=li=
to provide for him w=th=all, I haue layde out aboue half of itt
for clothes for him, & made accounte to laye oute that 8=li= of
his father's about the childe, w=ch= he now sends for to be
deliuered to his sergeaunt, & I haue accordingly lett him haue
3=li=, w=ch= is all that is left either of yo=r= La=p's= 5=li=
or his 8=li=, & so you may perceive I am a bare boorde, wherof I
thought fytt to acquainte yo=r= La=p= that such further order
may be taken as you shall thinke meete. And thus, w=th= myne &
M=r= Longe's our hartye thankes to yo=r= La=p= for yo=r=
remembraunce of vs, and myne moste p~=r=ticuler for the gloues
yo=r= La=p= sent me, I take my leave. Yo=r= La=p's= to comannde,
   Bridgett Longe.
2 April 1630.
   To the very worthy Lady, her very good freinde, the Lady
Bacon, theis.

<Q COR 1631 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 230>
[} [\CXLVII. SIR F. CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deare mother,
   When I consider in what a contradictorie waie I haue gone to
your La=pp's= commands and my one ingagments, I cannot but bee
extremly troubbled at my one misfortune, in that it appears to
you (and I confesse it may verie well appeare so) that I am the
worst of children to the best of mothers; yet I beeseech your
La=pp= bee pleased once more to give mee leave to bege that by
my letters which I had rather a great deale doe upon my kneese,
(but that I feare my sight wold bee rather a cause of adding
more affliction unto you, then of reastoring my selfe to my
selfe by your pardon,) which is, that your La=pp= would be
pleased to forgive this last act of mine, it beeing done by the
commands of the King and the Queene, whoo had appointed the time
at mie last beeing in the countrie, it not beeing in my power to
alter it, espetially at that time both of them beeing pleased to
express there favor so farre as to give us a +L1000 for ievells,
and +L2000 in monie, all which with our selves we shall bee
readie to cast downe at your La=pp's= feete, and bee holie at
your La=pp's= disposing. I beseech you doe not cast of and lose
your childe, who neither can nor will bee happie without your
La=pp's= favor, and whoo with that regained will ever strive
<P 231>
and I hope shall prove to bee as great a comfort as heether tow
hee hath proved otherwise; this is the onelie act which hath
manifested mee to bee as you please to tearme it your unnaturall
childe. This now beeing finished, your La=pp= shall not bee so
readie to command as I shall bee studious to obay; thearfore for
God's sake, and for your poore child's sake, who once had the
happinesse to bee dearly loved by you, bee pleased to restore
mee to your favor, and make us both so happie as to give us
leave to fech you either at Newmarket or at Broome; which beeing
done, I make no question but wee shall have cause to say and
thinke, that noe children are more blessed in a mother, and I
hope your La=pp= will thinke noe mother happier in children. And
now, deare mother, hoping and praying for that happie hower, I
restt, and ever shall,
   Your most obedient sonne,
   F. Cornwalleis.
[\January 1630-31.\]
   For my ever honored Ladie and Mother the Ladie Bacon.

<Q COR 1631? ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 231>
[} [\CXLVIII. ELIZABETH LADY CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }]
[^TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Madam,
   Both dutie and desire dooth, by the asshurans that your soon
hath euer gifen me of your La=p's= goodnes and loue to him, giue
me confidens by thes to beg your blessinge and his pardon, hoo 
<P 232>
thinks himselfe most vnhappy in your La=p's= displesure, which I
most humbly beseech yo=r= La=p= to forgeef to him, that so much
loufs and hono~rs you as that, withthout your La=p's= loue and
fauor restorde to him, hee will neuer ioye in any thing ether
hee dooth ore shall posses; therfor, I besech your La=p=, let vs
not any loungger suffer the want of that which will make vs so
infinitly happy: and thoue, by want of the good fortune of being
known to your La=p=, I coulde not hitherto hope of any fauor
from you, yet now my indeuors shall euer bee such towards you as
that I will all wais aprooue my selfe to bee
   Yo=r= La=p's= most obedient daughter and humble saruant,
   Eliza Cornwalleis.
[\1630-31.\]
   Madam, if your La=p= will be plesed to make vs so happie as
to let vs know when we shall haue the hono~r of seing you heare,
we will com down to fetch you vp, or wait of yo=r= La=p=
whersoeuer you will apoynt; and so ons more I kis your hands,
and by all humble intreattis beg your La=p's= pardon.
   For my much honored mother the Lady Bacon, thes.

<Q COR 1631? ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 232>
[} [\CXLIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Madame,
   Coming to see my cosen Randolph, shee gave me incurragment
that by lines ons more to tender
<P 233>
my humble respects to your La=p= wold not bee ill taken; which
if I may have the happines to know from you, I shall not faile
in this sarvis, or any that I think your La=p= will exsepte of.
And for the last letter I sent you, I ashure your La=p= your
sonne had no hand in it, for it was written before he came home,
and sent to the carrier's after he was gon, and so I gave it to
my cosen Randolph to send; being very sorry that it was your
La=p's= plesure to give ocasion to wright to you in that style,
for ther was nothing more contrary to my will, and I hope it
shall bee the last in that kind that shall pas between us: but
while you are plesed to stand at this distans, I feare my
husband will not do that which his hart most desirs, for he does
ashure himself that affection you ons had to him is clear gon,
and that it is hopeles for him to seek your love. I hope by your
goodnes thes doughts shall bee taken away; and if the King and
Queen's promis to yourselfe, of doing that for us as soon as
they can, will bee any satisfaction to your La=p=, I will
procure them to you, if your La=p's= ocasion bring you to town,
wher I shall be happy with your sonne to wait on you; or else I
am afraid you will not meet a great while, for he dares not com
down any more: therfore I shall wish for som good ocasion that
may bring you together, and make a harty frendshippe amongst us.
But give me leave, I besech you, but not to hinder the
<P 234>
speediest that I can getting of what we have promised to your
La=p=, to wish that the frendshipp might be before, otherwise I
must confes to your La=p= that I shall not joy in it; and give
me leave to say, that you will do yourselfe as much right as you
will give your sonn comfort and happines. But your La=p= is
wise, and knows what is fittest for you; and I can but wish you
the greatest happines, which I shall ever wish, that am
   Yo=r= La=p's=, if you ples to exsept it, affectionate and
obedient daughter,
   E. Cornwalleis.
1630-31.
   For my honored mother the Lady Bacon, at her house at Broome,
these. 

<Q COR 1631? ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 238>
[} [\CLIV. ELIZABETH LADY CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }]
[^TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Madame, 
   As I concluded with your La=p= at my coming from you, so will
I continue to pray to God to give you helth and us your favor;
in which we shall bee at the highte of our ambytion, to the
obtaning wherof we shall never willingly omightt any thing that
may witnes our desiers therto; and to that end I will endevor
all I can the speedy getting of the 3 thousand pounds which the
King and Queen hath ben plesed to promis us, the which so soon
as we have we shall most gladly present to your La=p=; till when
I besech you exsept of our desiers, and by thes my humble sarvis
<P 239>
and thanks for the noble welcom and favor which, for my gratious
mistrise's sake, at this time your La=p= gave me. But, Madam, I
hope the next time will bee for your sonne and my owne; in
confidens wherof I will ever bee,
   Yo=r= La=p's= most affectionat daughter to com~ande, 
   E. Cornwalleis.
[\1630-31.\]
   Madame, Sir Thomas Stafford, my cosen Villers, and M=r=
Elleiot all kis your La=p's= hands, and humbly thank your La=p=
for your coach.
   For the Lady Bacon, my much honored mother, these.

<Q COR 1631 ARANDOLPH>
<A AMBROSE RANDOLPH>
<G M>
<P 239>
[} [\CLV. AMBROSE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Most honoured Lady,
   I knowing youre love to the truth of newse, rather then first
or common report of it, shall, as you wisht me, send you a
relation of the King of Swedland's great victory, the 7th of
September, as it was tould by him that brought the newse to our
King since my cominge to towne; an Englishman, whoe the King
hath now knighted, his name Sir John Castell. The 4=th= of
September last, Tilley having taken by force the town of
Lipswitch belonging to the Duke of Saxe, he, being puffed up
with the victory, sent presently to the King of 
<P 240>
Sweth, and willed the messenger to tell the King that now he had
nosed and dishonoured him, and the 7=th= of that month he would
be in God's fielde, if he durst meete him there. The King of
Sweth sent him word againe that the loss of Lipswitch was noe
dishonor to him, for he never had the protection thereof, nor
any thing to doe with it; and as for meeting him in the fielde,
he, being a King, would not be at the calle of a dog, for so he
ever esteemed of him since his inhumane cruelty at Megelberge,
yet it was twenty to one he would be on that fielde the same
day. Thereupon Tilly with his army of 44 thousand was first in
the field; then came the King of Sweth with 38 thousand, and the
Duke of Saxe with 12 thousand, whoe led the vanguard and gave
the onsett upon Tilly; but he speedily drove the Duke and all
his men out of the field, except three of his regiments. Which
the King of Sweth seeing, presently assaulted that part of
Tilly's armie where his artillery was, yet he had the repulse
for awhile; but at the last the King took the artillery and
turned it upon Tilly's men, and so routed them all, and slew in
the field 12 thousand, and tooke 7 thousand prisoners: which
newse the Duke of Saxe hearing, came back againe, and gave the
King three horses laden with gold, and promised to paye his army
5 months. When this messenger came
<P 241>
away, that saw all the fight, Tilly was alive, and had been
prisoner half an houre, but, being unknown, escaped, hurt in the
neck, arme, and shoulder, which his chyrurgeon, who is now
prisoner, sayeth doth gangrene so that he cannot live. There
remaynes yet 22 thousand of Tilly's men, but it is not known
whoe is their commander. The King of Sweth is come from
Frankford, which towne doth now contribute to him, and neare the
Palatinat. It is sayd that the Lord Craven hath bought armes for
two thousand men, and that he will goe to the King. It is feared
that Marquis Hambeldon hath lost many, if not most of his men,
by sicknes. Colonel Morgan is made governour of Bergen up some.
Sir Francis Nethersole and his Lady are come to towne; they
landed at Yarmouth, and meant to have seen your Ladyship, but
were hindered by some disaster. My wife, with myselfe, present
our humble services and many thanks for your constant favors.
She went
<P 242>
to her mother, that is not very well, Wensday was seavennight;
the Lady Weston not being come to towne, by whose meanes she was
in hope to have pleasured her mother: but neither she nor
myselfe can yet get any money, which makes me by force to crave
your Ladyship's patience for my non paiment, having had good
words and a promise from the Lord Tresorer, which I feare will
prove slow in performance, as it doth to many others. I
delivered your La=p's= comands to M=r= Chitting, whoe is a sad
man for his cosin Short, and much the sadder, he being like to
loose some monys that he is ingaged to the marchant for him for
Twillops for him, Sir William Spring and others, which came so
late to him in his sicknes, that be feares they will miscarrye.
Thus, most humbly kissing your hands, I rest,
   Yo=r= La=p's= most affectionat servant, desirous to be
commanded, Ambrose Randolph.
November the 3=d=, 1631.
   The Duke of Vendome and his sonn are landed. He was sonne to
Henry IV. by Madame Gabriell.

<Q COR 1631 ARANDOLPH>
<A AMBROSE RANDOLPH>
<G M>
<P 243>
[} [\CLVI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^AMBROSE RANDOLPH TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Most honored Ladye, 
   Understanding this second time, not without some wonder, how
frustrat your La=p's= expectations of my letters hath beene by
reason of the messenger's neglect rather then my owne, I am now
determined to transgress by troubling you with them rather then
still be thought unmindfull of that duty which I must ever
acknowledge most due to your La=p=, that being the only and best
expression I can make to so noble a freinde. I therfore omitting
to speake of the new reformation on the King and Queen's side in
this court and of the Kinge's voyage into Scotland about the
midst of Aprill next, with the Queene's bringing him to Yorke,
if not further, and his going to Newmarket in March; as also of
the Duke de Vandome's goinge on Monday next to Bagshaws to hunt
for a weeke, and of his Lady's coming hither; all which I doubt
not but your Ladyship hath heard of, if not of the great
preparation of the Painted Chamber for the Marshall's Court
there apointed to sitt, with the Lord Leynsey, Constable, and
divers
<P 244>
others, to judge the lawfulness of single combats, and then, if
it be thought fitt to proceed that way with the L=ds= Massey and
Ramsey, to apoint the time, place, and weapon; all which will be
on Thursday next, or the Thursday after the tearme. Pure
discourse here now is of the great overthrow the Hollanders have
given the Spanyards in the West Indies, where they have sunk and
dispersed the Spanish fleet they went to meet, so that it cannot
be agayne repaired in many yeares, and have taken 2 very rich
carracks. Of the Kinge of Swethland's continewed victorys I sent
word in my former letter, if not of the present he sent Sir.
Tho. Roe, it being valewed at four and twenty hundred pounds, if
it continew not still copper, but be turned into plate, as the
King com~anded; for he sent as much copper as was worth 3000+L,
with a letter which he esteemes farr above the present, wherein
the King did thanke him for his good counsell and perswasions,
to which, next under God's owne hand, he doth impute all his
<P 245>
happy proseedinge: to whose best protection I committ your
Ladyship, resting
   Your most humble and affectionat serv=t=,
   Ambrose Randolph.
Novemb. 17 [\1631\] .
   Your window cushill shall be sent by M=r= Morse.

<Q COR 1631 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 245>
[} [\CLVII. SIR F. CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My deare Mother,
   In obedience to your La=p's= comands I take the libertie to
tell you that my wife and my selve, with all we have, are verie
well, thanks be to God! and a great deale the better since we
heard of your good health, which we shall both pray may continue
to make him happy, who is
   Your most affectionate and obedient sonne,
   F. Cornwalleis.
   I humbly thanke you, sweet Maddam, for the monie you weare
pleased to send me by M=r= Morse. Maddam, heere is noe newes but
of the duelists, who they say must fight. I and some of my
fellowes are comanded to goe to Winsor with the Duke of Vandome
on Monday, to hunt all the weeke the stag.
[\Nov=r= 1631.\]

<Q COR 1632? DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 246>
[} [\CLVIII. DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   Though I writ soe latlye by the carier, that my letters will
tread upon one another's heeles, yet I coulde not negleckt the
presenting of my seruis to you, hauing soe fitt a messenger as
S=r= Fredrick's man, which he sent to me; but him selfe I saw
not sins the day he came to London from Brome, therfore can say
nothing of him, but that I hope he continewes in the same minde
and dutifull respeckt to you that he profest the last time I
spake with him. I cannot but hope to see you at London shortly,
where I feare I shall be inforsed to stay till the end of next
tearme, to se if I can bring my mother's busines to some thing,
for yet we have done littil, by reson my Lady Weston was out of
toune and soe could never come to have my Lord and shee
together. I am in hope to bring my housband at last to the
busines you sent for him to Brome, for conserning his eastate;
which if he doe, I shall thinke it worth my jornye, and when it
is done I shall wish my selfe with you. In the meane time, where
soeuer I am, I am and euer will be, Your Ladiship's faithfull
frend 
   and humble seruant,
   Dorothe Randolph.
[\1631-2.\]
   To my most honored frend the Lady Bacon.

<Q COR 1632? DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 247>
[} [\CLIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^] 
My most honored Lady,
   Of the busines I most desire I can as yet give you the least
acount, for I have not seene eyther Sir Frederick or his Lady
sins I came to towne, onlie ons him in Hide Park with a company
of gentlewomen in a coach; he came and inquired of your health
and my cosin's, and that was all that passed: but he was ons to
see me when I was from home; and I beleve shortly she will come
to me, for I heard she did intend it, but she was ill of a soare
throat and the tooth-ache. Some say she is with child. I ons
thought to have gone to Grenwich to her because she was not
well, but sins I resolved to stay and see what they would doe.
The King's being at Grenwich hath made every bodie almost leave
London, that I am put to great deale of troble to find out those
that should ende my mother's busines, and the more becaus I have
bin ill after the manner I was, ever sins I left your Ladiship
at Brome. My Lady Barrington is not in towne, nor will be this
tearme; but M=r= Randolph has promised I shall come that way as
I come downe againe, which shall be as soon as I can. My cosen
Peter Meautys hath your letters and a copie of the paper you
sent; he staies but for a
<P 248>
winde. I spake to M=rs= West, who desired me to retorne you
humble thanks for your favour and bounty to her and her nece;
her house will be emty within a fortnight, she saith, if pleas
you to com~and it. I have sent you some patterns of stuff such
as is worne by many, but not much laes upon those wrought stufs;
but the newest fashion is plaine satine, of what collor one
will, imbroydered all over with alcomedes, but it is not like to
hould past summer. They weare whit sattine wascots, plaine,
rased, printed, and some imbroydered with laes, more then any
one thing, and whit holland ones much. M=r= Chitting com~ends
his services to you, and will bring the musition with him; which
when I have done, and inquired of Sir Charles Seasar, whom he
serves, of his condishions, I will send you worde, and will be
most carefull of all the com~ands you have or will be pleased to
favour me with, or what else may give testimony
   I am your faithfull frend and humble servant,
   Dorothe Randolph.
[\1631-2.\]
   Sins I writ this letter my Lady Cornwalies came to me, but
not Sir Fredrick; for he plaies least in sight, for feare, I
thinke, that I should tell him his owne, but I am like to doe it
the more, next time I see him. I tould his Lady the manner
<P 249>
of his carage at Brome, and that it was his own fault he came
away upon noe better termes. She professes she knowes his hart
much desires a sincere reconcilment; and the contrary, if it
continue soe, will shorten his life: yet I perseave not him to
be soe forward as she; but I know nothing but that he is soe
backward to come to me, where he might further that he soe much
desires. It will be too tedious to committ to wrighting all that
passed betwene my Lady Cornwalies and me; only this in generall,
she much desires, as she saieth, still to doe any thing that
might give you satisfaction. For the money, when she could get
it, you should have it; and, if in the meane time the King and
Queen's promis from their own mouthes to you will any way give
you content, she will not faile to procure that, and she desired
me to wright you word soe, which I made answer it was better for
her to writ it herselfe. I knew not how you would like it, yet I
let it goe on, that you might take that ocasion to speake with
the King; and I thinke it may serve you for the money well, and
be a meanes to get it sooner then they can otherwise, and it
will be a caus that any bodie will thinke sufficient to bring
you to towne. My Lady was afraid any thing that she should writ
would be unpleasing to you, but I strived to perswade her from
that; becaus, if you should accept any thing that she offers,
you might have it under her owne hand. for 
<P 250>
she might forget what she saied to me, and I might be accused
for mistaking.
   I thinke you weare never trobled with so tedious a letter,
and therfore now I will conclude, with a hartie wish of all
hapines to you and yours; and soe, sweet Madam, ons more
farewell.

<Q COR 1632 ARANDOLPH>
<A AMBROSE RANDOLPH>
<G M>
<P 250>
[} [\CLX. AMBROSE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Most hon=red= lady,
   I should think it a great happines to me if [{I{] could any
waye merit the thanks which I receyued by your last letter, for
there can neuer any thing happen within y=e= small compass of my
abillity to performe, that I shall not most willingly effecte to
doe your La=yp= seruice, or inwardly condemne my selfe of much
ingratitude. The newse we haue now a dayes is so variously
reported, that euen from good hands we cannot well be assured of
it; yet, rather then to be altogether silent, I haue both now
and y=e= last weeke sent your La=yp= what I heare, but, y=e=
carryer beinge gone before my man came to him, I haue here
inclosed it. Since which time it is reported, that Papinham hath
from y=e= Emperour releued the towne of Magdenbirg to his owne
cost; for, after he had with 8000 entred the cittie and spoiled
it, he blewe vp the cheefe churche and ruined all y=e= best
buldings, and then
<P 251>
tooke all y=e= welth of y=e= towne with him, and so ment to haue
returned in great triumph; but y=e= troopes of y=e= Duke of
Saxon and Count Horne surprised his treasure, and did defeate
all his men with a great slaughter. This, with my humbly and
most affectionat seruice, is the all I can present at this time,
resting
   You=r= La=yp's= most humble seruant,
   Ambrose Randolph.
February 8, 1631-2.

<Q COR 1632 ARANDOLPH>
<A AMBROSE RANDOLPH>
<G M>
<P 251>
[} [\CLXI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^AMBROSE RANDOLPH TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Most honored Lady, 
   If I had much newse, it were now superfluous to write it,
your La=yp= having so many of the courte y=t= can exactely
relate it. I therfore will only acquaint yor La=yp= with my owne
misfortune, that this night at 11 of y=e= cloke lost my best
freinde the Lo=rd= of Dorchester, his Lady beinge very great
with child. To which sad euent I may also add an other greefe,
which doth with y=e= former much press me, and y=t= is the
breache of promise from y=e= Lord Treasorer, whoe sayed I should
have my mony this last tearme, but now I have small hope of it a
good while, if all be true y=t= is sayd of the Exchequer. I must
therfore crave yo=r= La=pe's= pardon that I have not yet
discharged y=e= debte of mony which I 
<P 252>
so much desyre to paye to your La=yp=, but cannot yet so much as
sett a certaine daye to doe it; but, when you please to com~and
it, I shall most willingly procure it, and most thankfully rest,
   Your La=yp's= most affectionat and humble seruant to command,
   Ambrose Randolph.
Feb. y=e= 26, 1631-2.

<Q COR 1632 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 252>
[} [\CLXII. SIR T. MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Sister,
   I cannot but let you know what an afflycted and grieved lady
the Queene of Bobemia is for the death of the King, who dyed at
Mentz in Germany. Certainly no whoman shoulde tacke the death of
a husband more to hart then this Queene doth. I would that it
lay in your power any waye in these her sorrows to bee a comfort
to her, for I do asshewer you that you are much bound to her for
her good opinnyon of you; for, not long before the newes came of
the King's death, I had the honnor to wayghte upon her at her
court at Rine, where she then was, and, amongst other discourse
that her Majestie was pleased to move unto me, she asked me when
I heard from you, and wheather my sonne were with you still or
noe. I toulde her that he was: "Otherwaies," said her Ma=tie=,
"you neede tacke no care for him." I made her
<P 253>
answer that my care for him was the les, in regarde that I knew
him to bee with soe good a friend. And said she, "Your sister is
one of the best dispositions in the world, and every way I doe
love her very well, and better then any lady in England that I
knowe, and have a great deale of reason to doe soe." This was
her Ma=tie's= discours of you at that time before the Princes
and the rest of the ladies there present. Now, I pray, give me
leave to ask you a question, and that is, How you lyke my lyttle
girle that is with my wyfe? I must tell you that she hath bin
lapt in the skirts of her father's shirt, for she is beloved
where she comes, and I love her very well, and soe doth she me;
and yet somtymes I can wipp her and love her too. You must
excuse me for using this language, for, when I cannot see my
children, it does me good to talke of them. Now, as M=r= Mayor
of Dover tolde my Lord of Essex that he had a better cup of wine
in his sellar then that he had given his Lordship at that tyme
to drynck of, soe I must say I have another girle at home that
is as prettie as Nan, which God make me thankful to Him for, and
bles me with meanes as may provyde for them! And soe, with my
love and affection to you and all yours, I committ you to God,
and rest,
   Yours, T. Meautys.
Arnheim, the 2=d= of Desember 1632.
   To my deere sister, the Lady Bacon, geve these.

<Q COR 1633 EBACON>
<A EDMUND BACON>
<G M>
<P 254>
[} [\CLXIII. SIR EDMUND BACON TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Sister,
   This eveninge the messenger I sent to London is retourned;
what I have learnd of his sendinge ys, that the busynes wherin
my cosin dealt was the treaty of a match betweene M=r= Philip
Woodhouse and the daughter of the L. Lovelace, wherof I sayde
somewhat to you when we last mett. That gentlewoman is nowe
assured to one of the country where my L. lyveth, so that there
ys an end of that negotiation. This ys the awnsweare to what I
promised to enquire after. I will seale up these lynes unto you
with a larg acknowledgment of y=e= debt I owe you for your kinde
visitacion, and so leave you for this tyme, being
   Y=r= very loving brother, Ed. Bacon.
   I remember well the busynes treated on at Hacqueneye, and the
portion was 500+L. There was some difference about the payment
of some part of yt, which was the speciall cause why the match
went not forward.
Redgrave, Feb. 2, 1632-3.

<Q COR 1632 DRANDOLPH>
<A DOROTHE RANDOLPH>
<G F>
<P 255>
[} [\CLXIV. DOROTHE RANDOLPH TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My most honored Lady,
   I find my Lady Cornwalies in the same minde still of desiring
your fauor, and a willingnes to haue you come up, but not to
haue the King send for you; but I doubt not but shee will be
easilie aduised to make it her sutt to you to come, that you may
resaue the King and Queene's promis for the mony; but I persaue
shee is a littell afraid you should falle upon business past
when you shall speake with the King, not as it conserns S=r=
Fredrick but him selfe, in the matter of his iniuring you. But I
shall neede say noe more of anything, sins I asure myselfe you
haue resaued satisfacktion by S=r= Fredrick; therfore I will now
say noe more then that which I shall euer be redy to make good,
which is, that 
   I am your Ladiship's faithfull frend and humble seruant,
   Dorothe Randolph.
   My mother and housband present thar seruis to you. Thar died
of the plage but three. 
Maye the 25 [\1632\] .
   To my most honored frend, the Lady Bacon, at Brome.

<Q COR 1632 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 256>
[} [\CLXV. ANNE LADY MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
   According to my promise, I will not faile to let you
understand of my proseedings last week, which was the first
opportunity I could get to come unto the speech of my Lord of
Dorset, who was pleased to tell me how much his Lordship had
travailed in M=r= Meautys's behalf to his Majestie for the
making of a baronet, the which his Majestie will by no means
grant; so for that I am allredie answered. Now for Sir Alexander
Radcliffe and my Lady: so soone as I came to London, I did write
unto them, and sent those letters of M=r= Meautys's enclosed,
which, as it should seeme, they like of very well; for he is
come to London, and tells me the cheefe part of his bissines is
to take me down into the country, my Lady being very desirous to
see I me, so that now I resolve to goe along with him. Thus,
entreating you to let me hear from you as often as your leisure
will permit, I rest, 
   Your affectionate loving sister, 
   Anna Meautys.
London, Nov=r= 24, 1632.
   To my deare and much honoured sister, the Lady Bacon. 

<Q COR 1632 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 257>
[} [\CLXVI. SIR F. CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   In obedience to your La=p's= comands, I sende this messenger
to tell you that I am appointed to goe w=th= my Lord Marshall to
the Hage to fech the Queene of Bohemia; and therefore I humbly
bege your leave and blessing, and desire to knowe if your La=p=
will comand mee any services. My warning is so short that I
cannot have time to come kisse your hands my selve, for I knew
not of it untill w=th=in this hower, and wee must goe awaie upon
Wensday. Thus, with the presentments of mine and my wife's
humble dutie and respects to your La=p=, whoo desiers to be
excused for not writing, I rest,
   Your most affectionately obedient sonne,
   F. Cornwalleis.
[\December 1632.\]

<Q COR 1632 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 257>
[} [\CLXVII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FREDERIC CORNWALLIS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   My Lord Marshall making so much hast, I have onelie time to
tell your La=p= that wee are this
<P 258>
morning imbarking, having a good winde and faire weethere, so
that I hope wee shall bee at the Brill w=th=in 30 or 40 howres,
and then I shall with the next messenger give you an account of
our journey againe; till w=ch= time, and ever, I shall humbly
beg your La=p's= blessing for my boy and
   Your most obedient sonne, 
   F. Cornwalleis.
Marget, this Sunday morning, 30 day December [\1632\] .

<Q COR 1633 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 258>
[} [\CLXVIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FREDERIC CORNWALLIS
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   I must not omitt any oportunitie to present my humble dutie
and respects to your La=p=, and so give you an account of my
selve. This night wee are savely (thankes bee to God!) arrived
at Delph, w=ch= is w=th=in a mile of the Hage, and my Lord
Imbassador is gone privately to the Queene: in the morning he
retournes to us againe, and then the Prince and the States comes
to fech us to the court. This is all I know yet or have time to
write; only to bege your La=p's= blessing upon
   Your most obedient sonne, 
   F. Cornwalleis.
Delph, this New Year's night [\1632-3\] .

<Q COR 1633 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 259>
[} [\CLXIX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FREDERIC CORNWALLIS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   The winde hath been so contrarie that I had noe means all
this time to tell your La=p= that my selve and all our company
are verie well, and now verie shortly coming for England, but
w=th=out her wee came for; the cause I know not in particular,
but I finde in generall matters have bin ill carried, and that
is as much as wee dare inquire into. My Lord Goring is going in
a great hurrie, and I have onelie time to say I am
   Your La=p's= most obedient sonne,
   F. Cornwallis.
[\1632-3.\]

<Q COR 1633 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 259>
[} [\CLXX. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FREDERIC CORNWALLIS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   I besheech you excuse my scribling, for I broke my thumb in
Holland, and I cannot yet hould my pen allmost so longe as to
tell your La=p= that the Queene commends her love to you, and
hath sent you the last cheane shee wore: but my cabinet is not
yet come, and, if it weare, I should desire to deliver it and
her one language my selve, which I shall doe as soone as I am
but a littell rested; for 
<P 260>
wee weare forteene daies at sea, and truely I am extreame sore
with tumbling. Madam, I humbly beg your blessing for mee and my
boy.
   Your La=p's= most obedient sonne to love and serve you, 
   F. Cornwallis.
[\1632-3.\] 

<Q COR 1633 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 260>
[} [\CLXXI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FREDERIC CORNWALLIS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   It was not Hide Parke, nor any other foolerie, that kept mee
the last weeke from presenting my respects to your La=p=, but I
was at Kensington w=th= my Lord of Holland, who is still heare
for sending my Lord Weston a challenge; but I hope wee shall
have him againe at court w=th=in one day or two. Wee are mainly
factious heere and disordered w=th= this; but I dare write noe
more, onely, humbly beging your La=p's= blessing for mee and
Charles, I rest, 
   Your most affectionately obedient sonne,
   F. Cornwallis.
[\1632-3.\]
   For my deere and honored mother the Ladie Bacon, at Culforde,
these. 

<Q COR 1633 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 261>
[} [\CLXXII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FREDERIC CORNWALLIS TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My dere Mother,
   My hand is just well inough to present my humble dutie and
respects to your La=p=, and to tell you that all our Lords heere
are made frinds againe and restored to the King's favor; which
is all the newes wee have. Now, Maddam, I humbly bege your
La=p's= praiers and blessing for Charles and Your affectionately
obedient sonne, 
   F. Cornwallis.
[\1632-3.\]

<Q COR 1633 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 261>
[} [\CLXXIII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FREDERIC CORNWALLIS
TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   Will you give these leave to beg my pardon for not waiting on
you this night; for this morning the Duchesse and my Lord of
Holland are gon to London, and laied there comands upon mee to
waite of my Lord Dunlusse (my Lord Savage not being at home) as
longe as he staied, 
<P 262>
which will bee till Twesday, and then I shall not fule to waite
on you; in the meane time, and ever, I shall humbly beg your
La=p's= blessing for Charles and Your obedient sonne,
   F. Cornwallis.
[\1632-3.\]
   If there come any letters from my wife, I pray open them and
sende them to mee; and, if your La=p= can, I besheech you lend
mee 20=l=, for the truth is I have lost all my monie.
   For my honored deere mother the Ladie Bacon.

<Q COR 1633 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 262>
[} [\CLXXIV. ANNE LADY MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Most deare Sister,
   Not long since I had the happines to receve a letter from
you, the which I was not a little joyfull of. In that I was soe
far remote from you, I must confess it did grieve me, in that my
being was so long in England; but now, since it hath pleased God
to bring me so far as London in my way towards the Low
Countries, my desier is to receve your commands, for, soe soone
as I can get convenient shipping, I will make all the haste over
that I can. Deare Sister, I must aquaint you with the bissines
concerning Sir Alexander Radcliffe and my Lady; as yet I
understand by them how their estate is so much encombered, first
by
<P 263>
the occasion of their debtes, and then the redeeming of their
land, the which her father mortgaged unto the very dores of his
house, that, until such time as their own estate be settled,
they saye they shall not be able to establish any sartintie upon
me or mine; but so soone as they can take order for it, which
this terme they intend to do, then they have both promised me
seriously they will not faile to performe all that they can for
me. For them, I wish them much happines; and I must acknowledge
I have bine very kindly entertained of them both all the time of
my being there. Now, deare Sister, when you shall see them in my
absence, will you please to put them in mind of me, for their
intent is to see you this somer. Deare Sister, I must confess
that I am ashamed now againe to trubble you, but my necessitie
is such, occasioned by my living and teduous travels, that I
must intrete you to, if you please, to send me the money which
is to be receved at Midsomer. Were it that I did know how to
help myselfe, I would not bespeake one ower's time that you have
prefixed, but now I hope that you will take me into your
consideration. And thus, wishing you the blessings of this life,
and honor hereafter, I rest,
   Your most affectionate and truly sister ever to serve you,
   Anna Meautys.
London, April 16, 1633.

<Q COR 1633 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 264>
[} [\CLXXV. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^ANNE MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Most deare Sister,
   These are to intreate you, that, in my absence, you would be
pleased to show this letter to Sir Alexander and my Lady when
they shall come unto you, which is to remember them of those
promises made unto me at my being with them. The first was my
Lady whom I did acquaint, I telling her how much my case was to
be commisserated, the promises of my Lord and her mother being
now violated, the which they had with soe many solemn
protestations vowed to performe to me, concerning the jointure
of 200+L a yeare, and that if it should please God to take away
my husband, what would become of me and my poore children; and
withall I told her how much I did relie upon her goodnes, whom I
did assure myselfe did love me soe well that she would take my
case into her consideration: she said she would do what might be
done for me, and that she would tell Sir Alexander of it, who,
she knew, would not be against any good that she should intend
to any kindred of hers. Then I did breake with him myselfe, and
I must confes I found him very noble in his answer, sayeing that
soe soone as he had but settled his bissines, which he hoped to
dispach this terme, he would conferme something upon
<P 265>
me, which he said must be some of his own inheritance, for the
rest, he said, was all intailed, only Diss, upon his sone, which
is 80+L a yeare. He did solemnly swear to me he would not faile
to do for me all that laye in his power, and soe did my Lady
too; soe that, when they have settled their occasions, that then
they will really conferme something upon me. I and mine shall be
ever obliged to them, and I am assured God will prosper them the
better for their charitable performance. And soe, beseeching you
to be an assistance to me in this bissines, I shall, now and
ever, continew 
   Y=r= most affectionate and truely loving sister to be
commanded, Anna Meautys.
London, May 6, 1633.
   To my deare and much honoured sister, Lady Bacon.

<Q COR 1633 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 265>
[} [\CLXXVI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^ANNE MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Most deare Sister,
   I have receved that money which you was pleased to send me by
M=r= Greenhill, which came soe conveniently as I could wish. The
shipping is now come which I have soe long expected; and on
Saturday next I meane, with God's permission, to goe for the Low
Countries. I have been much beholding unto my Lady Cornwalies,
who was
<P 266>
pleased to come and see me, and after brought me to kiss the
King and Queen's hands. The King is gone for Scotland; and for
the other nuse att court concerning M=r= Villiers and M=r=
Garman, I thinke you will heare the relacion of it before these
shall come unto you, so that I shall not neede further to write
to you of it. Deare Sister, I give you thankes for all your real
favours, and all happines attend you and all yours; and soe,
being called away by the hasty marriners, I must desist to
write, but never to love you.
   Yo=r= most assured in all true affection,
   Anna Meautys.
From London, May 9, 1633.
   To my deare and much honoured sister, Lady Bacon.
   Favor me, sweete Sister, soe much to recommend my kind
respectes unto my sweete neveu and my neece; and, if you will
please to kisse pretie Charles and Hercules for my sake, I shall
be your servant.

<Q COR 1633 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 266>
[} [\CLXXVII. SIR F. CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   I am just now come from waiting of the King into Scotland;
and, meeting w=th= the carrier, have made him stay so long as to
tell your La=p= that I 
<P 267>
will very shortly waite of you, and humbly bege my selve your
La=p's= blessing for Charles and 
   Your La=p's= most affectionately obedient sonne,
   F. Cornwallis.
[\June, 1633.\]

<Q COR 1634 ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 267>
[} [\CLXXVIII. ELIZA LADY CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }]
[^TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Mother,
   I hoope, by God's great marsy to us, our sweete babs are as
well as thay seem; I humbly beseech Him to bless them with His
sauinge grace. But, Madam, it dus hartily greefe me that you are
so sade, becas I know it will hurte you, and then our suffrings
muste bee more: therfor, good Mother, for God sake cheere up
yo=r= sperrets, and striue all you possible can to forgeete what
is not to be helpte; for, Madam, I hope God will bee so gratious
to us as to keepe our deere Frede, and bring him to us again in
safty, and then, Madam, wee shall bee joyfull again. I wod to
God I wear ene with you, for trwly I wod doo ore say any thing
to cheere you up, for I haue more oblygation to yo=r= La=pe=
then euer datter in law had to a mother; and by that I bege of
you that you put an ende to all sade thouts for me, for, Madam,
God hath so infinitly blest us, that to[{morrow{] the thurd
parte of my greattest trubel will be ouer, and, I think,
withhout any suspission att all; I humbly beseech God
<P 268>
that I may neuer forgeet His great marsy in it. Madam, this is
heere a huge day of triounfe, and I haue taken so much hart and
currage as a leettell to appeer amongst them, thoo it be but
stagaring. My Lady Mary and my Lorde Charles are married, and
thay say thers more brauery then has been seene a loung time.
So, praing for yo=r= helth and dessyre of yo=r= blessing and
prayars for and to us all, I humbly kis yo=r= La=p's= hands as,
Madam,
   Yo=r= La=pe's= true affectinate datter and most humble
saruante,
   Eliza Cornewalleis.
[\January 8, 1633-4.\]
   Madam, I think it best not to send any letters to my husband
till we know whear he bee.

<Q COR 1634 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 268>
[} [\CLXXIX. SIR F. CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deare Mother,
   Since my comeing out of England I have been so happy as to
receive five letters from your La=p=; and in your last your
La=p= is pleased to take notise
<P 269>
of a letter of mine which it should seeme bore no date, and
thearfore your La=p= makes some question that it was written
before I came awaie. I will assure you, Madam, my journie was so
sudden, that I had not time to write for your La=p's= leave and
blessing, which were a great deale more considerable to me then
all the rest of my fortune. That made me send my wife to make my
excuse, and in my name to beg it: but for that omission I hope,
Madam, I shall easily obteine your La=p's= belief and pardon,
when I tell you I was so much distracted with the sense of my
own misfortune, that caused me to be giltie of so much
importunitie to your La=p=, that I hardly durst venture at all
to send it, but that the assurance of your La=p's= goodness
incouraged me to be confident that nothing can divert your
affection.
   Madam, your most obedient sonne, to dispose of as you like,
   F. Cornwalleis.
   Madam, I humbly beg your La=p's= blessing for myself and all
mine, which I am sure will make us all verie happy.
Paris, March 19,1633-4.

<Q COR 1634 ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 270>
[} [\CLXXX. ELIZA LADY CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Mother,
   I hade last Satterday broute me by a Londonere a bill of
exchange, as they cale it, for tow hunderd pounds, presently to
bee paid to the barare therof, becas hee had alredy hade the
munie. I must confes the hand is so licke my husband's, that I
ueryly beleue it came from him, but whear hee shude thinke I
shud haue the munny I cannot imagen; and, to, one of thos
letters I sente to y=r= La=pe= last was datted the same daye
that the marchant's note was, which was the 24 of May, and in
that hee spack of noe suche thinge. Now what in the worlde to
saye to this marchant for the presente I knowe not, becas they
say that if bills bee not presently paide heare, thay send back
and protest them thear, and then nobody will trust them for any
thinge. Now, if that wod bring him home, it weare noe matter;
but, alas! I fear it will note: therfore I tould the man, more
to delay the time awhile, then for any hops that I hade of the
munny, becas I think thear is more paide alredy to him and for
him then is dwe to him of his halfe year's reuenue, that I
myselfe was alltogether unprouided of such a sume of munny, and
that hee sed nothing of it in his letter to me; but I wode
<P 271>
sende doun to them that had the ordring of his bisnes, to see if
ther weare any munny to be had, but named nobody. I tould him it
wode be neere a fortnite before I coulde heare an ansor, which
time hee was contente to stay before hee sent backe to protest
him. Now I beseech you, Madam, gife me yo=r= aduis what to say
to him, for I know not whear to haue the munny; for, as for that
that I am to haue for the halfe yeare, I haue so long promised
paiment of what I can possibly spare, that I shud bee loth to
faile them, if I wantted not food for my saruants and myselfe,
being my husband has a compidens besides; for out of 150+L I am
shur I haue promised abufe 6 score pound, shift as I can, and
thay com and send daily for it, but as yet we can geet none out
of the Exchecer. I humbly beseech God to presarue my poore
husband, and bring him hom in saftie to us; but, Madam, thes 2
munths are mity loung. But, good Mother, I beseech you, be you
chearly and make much of yo=r= selfe; and with thes resaue my
humble thanks for our poore sweete babs, whom I most humbly
beseech Almighty God to bles with His sauing grace. Trwly,
Madam, I loung to see them and you, and you and them: and I hope
the Queene's being with childe, which now begins to bee
publeckly spoken of, shall bee noe hindrans to my coming to
yo=r= La=pe=, thoe I fear it will be to my stay with you; for
the Queene had gifen me leaue 
<P 272>
to a com to y=r= La=pe= when shee had gon her progres, and then
I shud a had too munths ore 6 weeks to af staide with you, and
now I fear I shall be cut shorte of that time. Here is much
talking of forren wars and armis joyning, yet on sartentie; but
I humbly beseech God kepe our Fred from amongst them and all
harm. My Lady Harborte, with all her youth and buttie, is deed
of a spotted feuer, I which is uery rife at London: she is much
lamented. M=r= Tressurer is taken in his rite hand with a ffitt
of the ded palsie, as he was sitting down to supper. I haue
sente yo=r= La=e= a littill barrell of Seffill oullifs: thay say
thay are uery good for the spleene, if thay bee eaten in a
morning
fasting, and disgested by sum exsersise. S=r= Thomas Stafford
and M=r= Gorge Elliot presents ther saruis to yo=r= La=pe= and
my faire sister, to whoom with my saruis I wish all happie
suckses, and bege yo=r= blessing for and too us all, and so
humbly kis yo=r= La=p's= 
<P 273>
hands as, Madam, Yo=r= La=p's= trv affectinate dautter and
humble saruant, Eliza Cornewalleis.
   The King has sente M=r= Harry Murry to see his sister the
Queene of Boheme: she has had many fits of ane ague. The Dutches
of Richman is uery uell recouered againe.
   Grinwich, the 4 of June [\1634\] .

<Q COR 1635 N3BACON>
<A NICHOLAS BACON>
<G M>
<P 273>
[} [\CLXXXI. NICHOLAS BACON TO JANE LADY BACON, HIS MOTHER.\] }]
[^TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Mother,
   I might bee accused of a greate deale of negligence if I
shoulde not, as often as I have any occasion, present my most
humble duty unto your La=p=; and I doe hope, Maddame, to
performe your La=p's= promise to my tutor for mee in regaining
y=e= time I have lost. Maddame, y=e= tailor saieth, for gownes,
either a wrought silke grogorine or a tuffe taffety in graine,
y=e= colour greene or tawny, which your La=p= pleaseth; for
sowing hee requireth 2 yardes of velvet or plush, which your
La=p= pleaseth: he requireth fourteen yardes for y=e= gowne,
besides the facings, of half a yarde broade. N. B.
Cambridge, May 23 [\1635\] .

<Q COR 1635 N3BACON>
<A NICHOLAS BACON>
<G M>
<P 274>
[} [\CLXXXII. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NICHOLAS BACON TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Mother,
   I never faile as oft as occasions shew themselves of
presenting my humble duty to your La=p=. I doe count it a great
happinesse, that, whilst I am deprived of your La=p's= sight, I
have the oportunity to doe so in writing; and I very much wishe,
Maddam, I could as well expresse it in words as it is really in
my heart: but your La=p= knoweth my dissability that way, and
therefore I hope you will excuse all faults committed in the
writing. Thus, Maddam, humbly craving your La=p's= blessing, I
rest, Maddam, 
   Yo=r= La=p's= most obedient childe,
   Nic. Bacon,
   My aunt Walgrave presents her humble service. Maddam, I shall
desire yo=r= La=p= to buy mee a blacke hatt, for that bever I
have begins to decay.
[\1635.\]
   To my deare and loving mother, the Lady Bacon, presente
these.

<Q COR 1635 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 274>
[} [\CLXXXIII. ANNE LADY MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Sister,
   These are to intrete you to let M=r= Meautys and myselfe to
understand the sertintie of your
<P 275>
determinate resolution, whether you will be pleased to assist us
in sending us one 100+L, and to paye yourselfe againe, as he
hath formerly writt unto you ... I can write noe nuse, but that
there is in these parts many trubbles: the Prince of Orringe his
armies and the French are joined together, but, before they did
meete, the King of France his armie did give unto the King of
Spaine's armie a great overthrow, in number slane and maimed
9000 men. I was very lately by her Ma=tie= the Queen of Bohemia,
who hath bine very sicke of an ague. She was pleased to tell me
she had bine that day 6 weekes sicke that I was with her
Ma=tie=, and that in the time she had 23 fits; first she was soe
extreme ill, that every fit held her Ma=tie= 12 houres long. Her
Ma=tie= told me she was so weake that she was not able to stand
upon her legs; but now, praised be God! she begins to mend
finelie. I must needes tell you I am much her Ma=tie's= humble
servant, for she is pleased to use me with a great deal of
favour. Her Ma=tie= hath done me the honor to give me some of
her own linen to make me clothes, and likewise some of her own
wareing linen for myselfe, which she had wont to ware herselfe
in child-bed. And although it hath pleased the Lord to laye many
trubbels and afflictions upon my deare husband & myselfe, yet I
thanke God it is His mercie towards us to give us a good repute.
My sweethart is now away from 
<P 276>
me, but I hope his absence will not be long. I am much your
servant that you are pleased to let me understand of the
wellfare and towardlynes of my son Hercules; for my other
littell sonne, I have never bine so happie as once to heare
whether he is dead or alive, since my coming over; &, although I
have written diverse letters to my neece Radcliffe, I have never
receaved any from her. I am so tedious, but love has no bounds
in my affection to you, and soe
   I remain infinitely yours,
   Anna Meautys.
Delft, June 1, 1635.
   I hope my sweete neece Anne is married before this; in which,
if it be so, I wish her much happines. 
   To my deare sister the Lady Bacon, at Culfourd.

<Q COR 1636 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 277>
[} [\CLXXXIV. SIR T. MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Syster,
   It was my fortune to come home att the same tyme my wyfe
receued y=r= letter and bill of exchange of a hundred pounds for
the three haulfe yeares due att Mid Sommer next, for w=ch= I
giue y=u= many kinde thancks; and, vntill that came, wee weare
holly out of moneys, in regarde of the ill payement w=ch= the
Stats macks vnto vs. I am sorry to reede in y=r= letter to my
wyfe, that my sonne is soe hard to learne, but I heere that it
proceeds not from deulnes of spiritt, but rather from wildnes,
w=ch= tyme may allter in him; for, yf I bee not deseued, hee is
licke vnto his second sister, whome, I prayse God for, is a fine
quick spiryted childe, but some thing hard to learne: but then
my eldest gyrle is much the contrary, and of a good memory, and
learnes more then I can finde meanes to haue tought hir, and I
maye saye hath all reddie sooed all hir wylde oats, soe much a
whoman is shee grone, God bles hir! My wyfe and my selfe are
much troubled in regarde wee cannot heere any thinge of ower
childe in Lankess-shire, wee haueinge sent soe many letters
theather, but can receue one ansour att all againe, neather dooe
wee knowe for the present weare to direct ower letters. 
<P 278>
I confes that I loue my children well, but I had rather to haue
none att all, then to haue them soe; but att my cominge for
Ingland I will cause him, yf that hee be aliue, to be fetched
from the place weare hee is. Thus, w=th= the remembrance of my
loue to y=u=, I rest
   Y=r= affect=e= lovinge brother,
   T. Meautys.
Delfe, the ij of June 1636.
   For my deere syster the Lady Bacon, att hir howse att
Coulfurd in Suffolcke, these.
 
<Q COR 1635 N3BACON>
<A NICHOLAS BACON>
<G M>
<P 278>
[} [\CLXXXV. NICHOLAS BACON TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Mother,
   I, according to your Ladyships commands and my humble former
promises, present my respects dutifull to your Ladyship. 'Tis a
troublesome time, I confesse, now; yet nothing may hinder a
ready hart from breaking out into this paper service. I suppose
your Ladyship expects to heare something concerning Dr. Sibes:
the newes is the worst we can send, for God hath removed him
from a mastership here to the fellowship of Himself and blessed
angels. A post this night gave us notice of his departure this
morning. God turne all to the best. My tutor & M=r= Pots
recommend
<P 279>
their humble service to your Ladyship; and I, as duty bindes me,
close my letter with nothing but this, that I resolve to remaine
   Yo=r= Ladyship's most obedient sonne,
   Nich. Bacon.
Cambridge, July 6, 1635.
   To my deare mother, the Lady Bacon, at Culforde, present
these.

<Q COR 1635 N3BACON>
<A NICHOLAS BACON>
<G M>
<P 279>
[} [\CLXXXVI. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^NICHOLAS BACON TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Mother,
   I humbly desire your La=p= not to thinke it out of any
neglect that there came no letter from me this weeke, for I had
written, and the carrier was gone to bedd and would not rise.
Madam, we have, I hope, a very good master, which is some
comfort to us for the losse of D=r= Sibes. Madam, I shall desire
to waight upon your La=p= when my brother & sister come downe,
if it please your La=p=; for I shall herein, and all other
things, submit I myselfe to your La=p's= pleasure, that so I may
performe the part of 
   Yo=r= La=p's= most obedient sonne, 
   Nicholas Bacon.
Cambridge, July 15, 1635.

<Q COR 1635 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 280>
[} [\CLXXXVII. SIR F. CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Mother,
   I hope your La=p= was pleased to receiue my wiefe's excuse, &
so to pardon mee that I had not the honor to write to your La=p=
the last weeke; for, iust as I was aboute it, the Kinge sent mee
in a greate deale of haste to my Lorde Sauage, whoo, for all my
speede, I founde deade beefore I came. Hee hath leafte noe will,
& they say that his debts are a greate deale more then his
fortune will bee after my Lord Riuers his death, espetially if
hee shoulde die beefore my Ladie. Madam, all the other newes is
of the ariuall of the Prince Elector, whoo came to the court
vpon Saterday night. I was sente w=th= a message a Friday to
meet him at Rochester; and vpon Saterday morning my Lorde of
Douer, my Lo=rd= Maltravers, w=th= ther gentillmen, did fech him
to Gravesend, wheare my Lord Marshall met him from the King, &
my Lorde Goring from the Queene, w=th= diuers Earls, Lords, &
gentillmen, whoo did bring him to the Tower by water; and there
weare the King's & Queene's coches to receive him, w=th= thirtie
coches more, 
<P 281>
having 6 horsesse a pice. Hee was received at Whitehall w=th= a
greate deale of state in generall, w=ch= hath giuen the worlde
much satisfaction & makes all men think that this iourney will
conduce much to the good of his affaiers. Wee are all now at
Theobals, wheare wee shall stay till Saterday, & then retourne
againe to London, &, I thinke, the next weeke to Hamton Court.
Madam, this is all the newes; for that w=ch= I shall say to you
of my selve will bee none, w=ch= is, that I haue bin faine to
pay away all the little monie that M=r= Morse brought to stop
some few people's mouths, & yet it will not halfe satisfie them;
so that I haue not a shilling left for my selve, nor know not
what to doe, vnlesse your La=p= will bee plesed to take mee into
your consideration, w=ch= if your La=p= shall please to doe now
at this time, you will eternaly oblige, Madam,
   Your La=p's= most affectionately obedient sonne, 
   F. Cornwalleis.
   Madam, I will not faile to waite on your La=p= at Broom at
the awdit.
   Theobals, November 26, 1635.

<Q COR 1636 ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 281>
[} [\CLXXXVIII. ELIZA LADY CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }]
[^TO JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Mother,
   It was your favore to me that made me sende to the carrier to
inquire after my letters, which I 
<P 282>
shulde be much to blame to neglect without just excuse, sins you
are pleased to give them so good acceptans; but I beleave the
carriers, or some belonging to them, very faulty. I am sure they
have been so to me this winter. I had my man Woddull at
Newmarket this weak, and it was sum trubble to my mind that he
shuld com so neere and not waite of yo=r= Ladyship; but his
bisnes was not mine, but my Lady Holland's, for she borrod him
to go to Cambrey upon the report that the Prins Elector wod not
go there. Madam I humbly thanck you for yo=r= good news of my
husband and his bairns, and for yo=r= love and favor to us all,
which I beseech God to rewarde you for us all with His saving
grace; and I beleave, that yf my husband had staide lounger with
yo=r= La=p=, which I shud a bene glad of, he wod a bene cleane
well: but I heare he means to be hear Satterday, therefore I
will not write to him. Madam, I have not seene M=r= Morse, but
I did much feare that he wod be so neare coming up when my
husband came down, that there wod be nothing now don in his
bisnes: and M=r= Morse tould me that yo=r= La=p= might have
assurance and the remainder settled there as well as here, which
I was very glad of; for I know yo=r= La=p= cannot com here but
with much trubble and charge, and we had nede be as sparing of
that as we can in small matters, sins
<P 283>
nesessity forses us to crave yo=r= assistans in so great a
proportion; for trewly, Madam, if you do not helpe, I much feare
all will be naught. But trewly, Madam, my husband is very good;
but, if he put his estat into a stranger's hand, I shall never
looke to see any part of it againe: but for yo=r= favor to me in
desiring to keep my joynture free, I cannot saye enuff, but I
shall laye it up in a thankful harte with yo=r= many other
kindnesses. But I hope my husband will be willing to give yo=r=
La=p= any assurance that you pleas, and trewly, Madam, the more
tie you have upon him and his estate the gladder I shall be, for
I veryly beleve it will be [{best{] for him; and I pray God give
us all a happie meeting. But when I think how troublesome I have
been, and how unplesing company I must yet be to every body, I
recall my wishes, and hope that God will give me that hapines
when I shall be more capable of it then now I could, being so
often ill: but, Madam, if I do think of any thing that my
stomach will sarve me to eat, I will make such use of your kind
favour, for which I humbly thank you=r= La=p=, that you shall be
sure to hear of me. My sister Jarvess and her husband wear with
me this day; they both present ther sarvis to yo=r= La=p=.
Gordon, the oulde blade, presents his humble sarvis and thanks
for the chees; and says yo=r= La=p's= kindness is much more to
him then the chees, and that one of thes
<P 284>
days he will present you with an eppissell. My Lord Carlell is
hugely amended after his fissick, and, they say now, will not
die at this time. Sum says hear that the Tresurer's stafe shall
be carred by a paire of lawn slevess. I have given my cosen
Randolph yo=r= La=p's= letters. I humbly kiss your hands, as
   Yo=r= La=p's= most affectionate daughter, 
   Eliza Cornwalleis. 
   Pray, Madam, be pleased to bles and bus the babs for me. Sir
Thomas Stafford presents his sarvis: he is pitteously in love,
and som times he's in hope and som times in despare, and
what will be his ende I know not. The Prins of the Temple, they
say, has sent to offer his sarvis to my cosen Semer, and they
say she has refused him; but they say that by Ester, or before,
we shall have two of our French women married to Inglishmen,
Crittian to S=r= Thom=s= Shelly's son, and Cattoe to M=r= Arpe.
The Quene went this day to Wallingforde, but in her chaire.
S=t= James's, on Thursday the 4 of February 1635-6.

<Q COR 1636 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 285>
[} [\CLXXXIX. SIR F. CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother,
   I am extreame sorrie that this occation is hapened, which
makes me sende this messenger to kisse your hands and to tell
you that I believe Sir Arthur Capell is uncapable either to
serve your La=p= or his nephew by reason of an unfortunate
accident which hath happened to him lately, which was the
killing of Sir John Jenithrope in a duel, which although it wear
fairly and with a great deal of pressing, so that he is not in
danger for his life, yet by it, till after his trial, he is
uncapable to follow any sute in law, and he himself is much
disordered by it; the more because the gentillman that he killed
and he had been a long time verie good friends. The particular
relation I leave to my wife's man.
   Now, Madam, I have nothing more to say, not being able to
advise, only to expect yo=r= La=p's= commands, which shall be
obeied by, Madam, 
   Yo=r= affectionate and obedient sonne,
   F. Cornwalleis.
S=t= James's, May 4, 1636.

<Q COR 1636 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 286>
[} [\CXC. ANNE LADY MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Sister,
   Although I haue wriet diuers letters vnto y=o=, of w=ch= as
yet I haue not receiued any answare of them, yet such is my
affection to y=o=, y=t= I can omit noe vpportunitie to doe y=o=
seruies. M=r= Meautys is in y=e= feeld before y=e= Conac, y=t=
y=e= enime hath taken this summer agin from vs. I haue not seene
him this halfe yeare, and I feere a winter campayn will detaine
him y=e= longer from mee, in y=t= he hath y=e= command ouer
those companies y=t= lies there. Y=e= Queene of Bohemia is now
in y=e= Hage; she was pleased to doe me y=t= honor to be
godmother to my child, y=e= w=ch= I was ignorrant of vntill y=e=
Queene's retorne from Rine. I told her M=tie= y=t= y=o= was y=e=
other godmother, y=e= w=ch= shee was very well pleased to
vnderstand; her Ma=tie= telling of mee y=t= shee did know y=o=
to bee a lady y=t= was indued w=th= a great dell of honour and
virtue, & y=t= in her knowledg y=o= did loue yo=r= brother very
well, w=ch= was a thing most commandible in y=o=: indeede,
Sister, her Ma=tie= doth use you w=th= much fauor, and hath
promised me y=t= what soeuer doth lie in her power to doe mee
good shee will not faile to perform it: shee was pleased to giue
vnto my littell Jane a fine present, w=ch= M=r= Meautys did send
mee from Arnheim.
<P 287>
Deare Sister, in my other letters I did desier y=o= to send vs
ouer y=e= monie; w=ch=, if y=o= please, should bee very wellcome
vnto vs. Thus, wishing much happiness vnto y=o= and y=ors=,
   I remaine redy to doe y=o= seruise in all true affection to
my end,
   Anna Meautys.
Deft, y=e= 9=th= of June 1636.
   Deare Sister, if y=o= please, send mee word how my Hercules
doth, to whome I send my blessing. 
   To the Lady Bacon, at Culford.

<Q COR 1637 ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 287>
[} [\CXCI. ELIZA LADY CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Mother,
   I hope you have by this time recovered the werines of your
jurney, and given our babs leave to come to you. My Lady
Nuport's daughters' was not the plague, thanks be to God! Truly,
Madam, I did much feare your being very wery of so long and
solitary a jurny; and my husband said that he was sorry he was
putt to ask to stay, for that case staies him still in town, as
he says to me, for I have not as yet seen him sins that day that
you wente out of towne; but he on Sunday sent M=r= Tom Howard to
me, that I would be reddy to goe,
<P 288>
into the beginning of the nexte weeke. I sent him worde I would
do what I could; but now, I thinke, I shall not come so soone,
because the Queene is now resolved to stay hear till Michlemas,
and I have been some times away of late, so that I shude do well
to wait a fortnight or 3 weeks, and besides I wod willingly know
what will become of my mother's appearle affair, so that I wrote
to my husband by this messenger not to stay for me after he have
dispatched his owne affayres; and when I am coming down, I will
beg the favor of your cotche's meeting me at ... Madam, I can
say nothing of Sir Tho., only, as soone as you were gone, he
went to lead me up to your chamber, and then he said to me and I
to him as before, and soe he went away, and I saw him noe more.
Then my husband and I went to bed into your bed, and at nine
o'clock I rose and sent for M=r= Morse, who read all the
writings to my husband as he lay, and then he sealed them, and
bade M=r= Morse put them with the writings. I wished the fine
and all had bene passed, but I hope it will. The King went
yesterday to Tibal's, and comes not till Saterday. The Queene is
much delighted with her howse. Madam, I reseved, I humbly thanke
you, your ring by Tom Howard, and he tould me that your La=p=
meant to goe through that night. Truly, my good Mother, I very
much long to hear how you
<P 289>
do, and how you got home; and so I hope I shall by him that
carries this to London. Truly, Madam, I am so much bound to you
for your love and care of me and mine, as no creature is more;
therfore all I can say is so littell. But God rewarde you, and I
humbly besech God to bless us all with His saving grace, and to
give us all a happie meeting. Madam,
   Y=r= La=p's= true affectionat daughter and humble sarvant,
   Eliza Cornwaleis.
Otlands, the 11 of Julye 1637.

<Q COR 1639 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 289>
[} [\CXCII. SIR T. MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Sister, 
   Sence the rytinge of my last, allthough I much desired it, I
haue not harde from y=u=. My retourne to the Hage beinge upon
the sudden, occationed by the death of one of my children, that
giues mee meanes to rite att this time vnto y=u=, and to desier
y=u= that the haulfe yeare's anewytie, w=ch= will be dew att
this somer next, maye be transported ouer vnto my wyfe in my
absence by a letter of exchange, whoes acquittance y=u= shall
receue for the same. Y=r= frinds, M=r= Laurence and his wife,
are in good health att Arnheim, the ayer of w=ch= place is uery
agreeable vnto them, as to the rest of the
<P 290>
good sosietye that liue there: they speeke honourably of y=u=
and I dooe perswade myselfe woulde be glad to dooe y=u= any
servis in their power. Thus, kissinge y=r= hands, I rest
   Y=r= affecty=e= brother and servant,
   T. Meautys.
Hage, this 6 Maye 1639.
   For my deere sister, the Lady Bacon, att Culfourd.

<Q COR 1639 ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 290>
[} [\CXCIII. ELIZA LADY CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Mother,
   I humbly thanke you for your kind letter and desire of my
company, which truly, Madam, is very pleasinge to me, and I
shude be very glad to see pratteling Frede, yo=r= La=p=, and all
the rest of my good frends at cheerly Culford, if I coulde: but,
alas! Madam, I feare I shall not this somere, because it is so
near spent, and now M=rs= Arpe looks within a weeke, and my
poore Lady Shelly is going away for a month to Sir Thomas
Shelly's, to see if that air will do her any good for her case;
if not, she must presently away for France, for Doctor Caddiman
says, if she lose this season, it will be too late for her to
go; so that, Madam, by these resons yo=r= La=p= may know that I
must do as I may. But, Madam, though I see not our babs, yet my
comforte is that within 2 months I 
<P 291>
shall have the happines of seeing her that, under God, is the
preserver of our babs; for whom with myselfe I give to yo=r=
La=p= humble thanks, humbly beseching God to bless us all with
His saving grace, and to give us happie meetings when it shall
please Him. I am sorry silly Harriote is still so great a
wagler, for now I shall feare her not out growing it; but God's
will be done: and for Frede, I think the best is your opinion of
not letting him use them till it shall please God to give him
more strength. I beseche yo=r= La=p= to bless them all, and be
pleased to present my sarvis to my sister and brother. I have
sente him his sworde by the carrior. I have obaied your com~ands
to me. Lady Denbigh remembers her sarvis to yo=r= La=p=, and
gives you many thanks for your fine recete. My Lady Duches yet
houlds out still; she is yet at her aunte of Richmond's, so that
now we see her but seldom. Monday was my Lord Felding's marage
day; but so private, that his mother did
<P 292>
not know, or at lest pretended ignorans to every body: theare
was nobody at the marage but the 2 fathers, the man and the
woman, and one doctor, at a church in London. The which daye
thear had like to have bene a great duell fought on horseback
betwene my Lord of Holland and my Lord Nucasell; but, God be
thanked! by His marsy it was prevented, for they had fought 3
to 3, and it might have begott many quarels: it seams it was
something about their cullears flying at the army; but now all
is well, and they good frends againe, The Knight Marshall should
have bene second to my Lord Holland, and one M=r= Palms to my
Lord Nucasell; and M=r= Walter Mountagu, taking a supposition on
Sunday night upon seeing Palms with my Lord Holland, on Monday
by daye light went to my Lord Holland, and hung on him like a
bur that is not to be shaken off, by which meanes before they
could finde one to fight with him, they wear found out by my
Lord Nuport and M=r= Wilmotte; but the brute first ran about the
towne that it was my Lord Essex and Holland, because, as it
seems, that M=r= Palms keeps much with Essex. Madam, I shude
have sente yo=r= La=p= worde last weeke of 2 warrants that my
husband has given, one to M=r= Fenne, our clarke, and one to
M=r= Cosin,
<P 293>
M=r= Treasurer's stuarde; 'twas partly by my meanes. Madam, I
now have the writing for the stuardshepe of Aye from the
atturney, and have sente it to M=r= Lucas for my Lord to present
to the Queene for her hande, with telling him that, as soone as
her Ma=tie's= hand was at it, I shude send to him again from
you, meaning the hundred pound; which he semed willing to
understand, for his answer was, that if his Lord did not get the
Queene's hand within 3 or 4 dayes, he wode returne it to me
againe to presente to the Queene, for her hand must be to it
before we can get the seales. So, Madam, yesterday I wrote to
M=r= Fenne to pray him to provide a hundred pound against the
end of this weeke or the begin~ing of the next; but he gave it
to Josias, and I shall kepe it till next weeke that I reseave
your plesure, though it be signed in the meane time; and for
M=r= Lucas's own rewarde, I shall, according to your directions,
eyther give him what you plese, or tell him that you will be his
debtor till Michaelmas tearme that you come up: but, Madam, the
wrighting this makes me sweate, because we are so chargeable
every way that I am ashamed of it. I pray God give us gras to be
thankfull, and in good time to make good use of your love and
favour to us, for, truly, Madam, many wod be wery of doing so
much; for all which, with your huge kindnes, God
<P 294>
rewarde you! And, my good Mother, I must now conclude with
beging your prayers and blessing to and for us all, and so I
humbly kis your hands as, Madam,
   Yo=r= La=p's= tru affectionat daughter and humble sarvante,
   Eliza Cornwaleis.
White-Hall, the 15 of August 1639.
   I beleve Charles will think M=r= Fenne's absence very long;
and, yf I had thought of his going there, I should have beged of
your La=p= that, going or coming, he might have looked upon our
new purchas: it is just as forward as the stuardeshepe, and yet,
for aught I know, it may be a fortnight ere they get all the
seales, because some of the lessees are yet out of towne. Madam,
this is all the papers that has bene found about the chambor
sins your going. George Elliote's sarvis must not be forgot. I
say nothing of my husband, because he says he will write
himselfe. I thanke God he is very vell.

<Q COR 1641 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 294>
[} [\CXCIV. ANNE LADY MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My deare sister,
   I give you manie thanks for your kind letter, which I receved
by M=r= Meautys's ancient, who tells me he is very much your
servant for your kind
<P 295>
intertanement of him, the which we both take really as done to
ourselves. I understand by him my niece is maried; I pray God
make her happie, and I doe sincerely wish that all things may
fall out to your contentment. This gentellman doth not fale to
acquaint me how judissially carefull you are of the education of
our sonne, and by his relation gives me much hope and comfort of
him: therfore, in the first degree, I render God the prayse for
the present comfort, not doubting, if the Lord shall be pleased
to increse the number of his dayes, your haveing layed soe good
a foundation, but that the expectation of his futer time shall
be blessed in honoring of his Maker; and, secondly, in rendering
you all humble and dutiefull thanks for your tender care and
true affection which you have been pleased to bestow upon him.
   Thus, with my prayers to the Almightie for you and all yours,
I kiss your hands, 
   Yo=r= most affectionate and truly loving sister, ever to
serve you, 
   Anna Meautys.
Hage, 19 of Maye 1641.

<Q COR 1641 FCORNWALLIS>
<A FREDERIC CORNWALLIS>
<G M>
<P 296>
[} [\CXCV. SIR F. CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
My deere Mother, 
   I am extream sensible of your La=p's= indisposition of
health, and truly I should omitt so much of my dutie, if, with
all the power I have, I should not importune you, even on my
knees, to doe somthing speedily for your La=p's= preservation.
Madam, I heare by my sister, whome I have had time but just to
see, and also by my wife's letters, that your La=p= is
inclinable to a dropsie. I neede not tell you how dangerous that
disease is, if not timely prevented; but, Madam, give me leave
to desire you most humbly, if not for your own sake, yet for
your children's sake, for my pore children's sake, nay, even for
God's sake, that you will be pleased to come up to this towne
and aske the advise of our phisitians here, who say that the
waters at Tunbrige are extreame good for your condition. Madam,
this I should have saide to you myselfe, but that in good faith
we are here in such disorder, and nobody left, that the King
will not let me bee awaie, not for a night; but, as soon as I
can get but two daies' libertie, I will not faile to be with
you. Madam, I have but one thing more to say; that is, humbly to
beg, that, when your La=p= hears of our greate disorders and
troubles here, you will be pleased to believe that hitherto I
have carried myselfe
<P 297>
with a reasonable clear reputation on both sides, I meane the
King's and Parliament's; so I shall continue still to doe
nothing that may render me unworthy either of my mother or
countrie, or for your La=p= not still to esteem me, Madam, 
   Y=r= most affectionately obedient childe,
   F. Cornwalleis.
Whitehall, June 18, 1641.
   For my honored mother, the Lady Bacon.
   I refer for newes to Church his letter.

<Q COR 1641 ECORNWALLIS>
<A ELIZABETH CORNWALLIS>
<G F>
<P 299>
[} [\CXCVII. ELIZA LADY CORNWALLIS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO
JANE CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Mother,
   What to say to your busines I do not as yet know, for we are
still fed with hopes, which to me are no satisfaction till I see
performans; for all this weeke we have been tould by Lorde -,
that he wode do all that in him laye as much as for himselfe,
and that I shud never know all that he wod say to them, but if
they shude go from their words, that then he wod have a bill put
in, and then he wode make short worke with them. I desired that
if theare were a meeting appoynted, that it might be heare in
his chamber, that I and my brother might be theare too. I
carried M=r= Fenne to him at his chamber heare on Friday, that
he might be the better known to his Lordship, and tould him that
he and your solissitor had no other busines in towne but the
attendans of this: and every day sins M=r= Fenne has sought him
at his chamber, and I in the galleries, and Josias at
Westminster, yet we missed him, and still put
<P 300>
from day to day by one ocation or other that we coulde not
exsepte against; and to night he tould me that M=r= Cappell had
bene with him to day againe, and that Sir Tho. wod be in towne
tomorrow, and that then they wod 4 or 5 of them meete aboute it,
and that he need not doubt but that they shude make a good and
peasable end, and that tomorrow night or Saturday they wode
waite of his Lordship againe; and my Lord has promised me that
if theare be any meeting appoynted before him, which I tould him
I extremely desired, that he might see and judge of the justnes
and resonablenes of the accounte, that I shude have notice of
the time, and I wish words may be kept of all sides, which till
I see done I cannot much credit. Madam, I ask your pardon for
not giving you all this time an account of our cosin's husband;
truly I had it 2 or 3 times in my hede when I went to write, and
still like a best forgot it: but, Madam, he had not the plas,
for the Kinge wod not speake, nor ever did he say he wode, as it
seemed; for, when I came to put the Queene in minde of what they
tould me she had already promised, she toulde me, No indeed, she
had not promised at all, for all she said was to Doctor Caddiman
that she wode speak to the King, but she was much afraid he wode
not do it, because he did not love to do it. And now, my good
Mother, with your pardon I also bege your
<P 301>
prayers and blessing to and for us all: so humbly kisse your
hands as, Madame,
   Yo=r= La=p's= true affectionate daughter and humble sarvante,
   Eliza Cornwaleis.
   My Earle of Cumberland is dead, and, they say, the King of
Spaine. Madame Wantlete and George Elliote presents there sarvis
to your La=p=. Mine, I beseche yo=r= La=p=, to my brother and
sister and our bairns. The King's children come to towne on
Tuesday for all winter; the Prins and Duke York to Durham House,
the two daughters and your master to Somerset. My Lady Shelton
has the small pox; they feared the Prins, but he is well.
[\1641.\]

<Q COR 1642 T1MEAUTYS>
<A SIR THOMAS MEAUTYS>
<G M>
<P 301>
[} [\CXCVIII. SIR T. MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deere Sister,
   The opertounytye faveringe the occation, after too years'
space that I haue receued noe lynes from you, I woulde not pas
by it w=th=out rytinge somethinge that maye onely let you knowe
y=t= you haue a brother yet alyue and in health, to dooe y=u=
service, and reddy to expres his loue vnto y=u= upon
<P 302>
occation yf y=u= shall commande him. The tymes as they now are,
or maye be, may invyte y=u= to vse me booth by waye of fact and
counsell; yf it dooe, I will not fayle y=u= in neather to the
vtmost of my abillytye and power. Thus in haste I rest
   Y=r= affect' lovinge brother and servant, 
   T. Meautys.
Hage, the 28 of Aprill 1642. 
   For my deere sister, the Lady Bacon these.

<Q COR 1642 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 302>
[} [\CXCIX. ANNE LADY MEAUTYS TO JANE LADY BACON.\] }] [^TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Sister,
   The ernest desier I haue to heare of yo=r= health makes mee
indeuore to find out y=e= securest meanes y=t= these lines may
come w=th= saftie into yore handes, y=e= times afording mee soe
conuenient an vpportunitie by y=e= occation of my neese
Cornwalles being here, whose sosietie is soe exceeding good,
y=t=, were it not pregudiciall to hir y=t= I soe much loue and
honor, I wish I might allwayes inioy y=e= happienes of soe
deserueing a friend; but this age of mutilletie permites vs noe
sertintie of comfort long, and therefore w=th= patience I must
condicend to what is determyned by y=e= greater Power. My neue
Bacon is very well, and is pleased some times to come
<P 303>
and visset his vnkle and mee. I should take it very well if y=u=
would spare soe much time as to write to mee: I haue recomended
diuers letters vnto y=o= sence I receued those monies w=ch= was
due att Chrismas last, and likewise acknowlidgeing my selfe much
ingaged to y=o= for yo=r= gift y=o= was pleased to send mee, and
w=th= God's permission I will not deseest in my prayers y=t= Hee
would restore it againe to y=o= and yo=rs= y=e= good y=t= you
are pleased to doe to mee and mine. Now I desier y=o=, deare
Sister, y=t= monies, w=ch= will be due att Midsomer next, y=o=
will bee pleased to giue order to him y=t= y=o= shall command,
y=t= I may receue it against y=e= day, in y=t= M=r= Meautys hath
disposed of those monies to my youse and my children's, and y=t=
those monies may bee retorned vnto mee according to y=t= rate
y=t= y=e= exchange is now att, and by y=e= same partie y=t= I
receued it last of. Thus, commiting y=o= and all yo=rs= into
y=e= protection of y=e= Allmightie, I conclude now and euer to
bee
   Yo=r= most affectshonate loueing sister to serue y=o= to my
end,
   Anna Meautys.
Hage, the 25=th= of Maye 1642.
   My deare sister, the Lady Bacon, at Colford, these.

<Q COR 1644 AMEAUTYS>
<A ANNE MEAUTYS>
<G F>
<P 304>
[} [\CC. THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^ANNE MEAUTYS TO JANE
CORNWALLIS^]
Deare Sister,
   Although I cannot bee soe happie to receiue yo=e= lines, yett
yo=e= kind rememberance hath not failed to give mee an assured
testimonie of yo=e= ferme and conciderable affection in
condicending vnto my request, coming in a time soe acceptable,
y=t=, had it not bine, I and mine had not had where w=th=all to
haue subsisted; therefore thinke y=t= y=e= haue releeued soe
many dieing soules, w=ch= had suffered, had not God ordained
y=o= to bee y=e= meanes of our presaruation. To this day my
husband is still att Arnheim, and is so misearablely intreted by
there iniustice, y=t= in this spase of a yeare hee hath not bine
able to send mee any monie or to come vnto mee, and through his
heuie troubbles and wantes hee is grone very sickelie, and hath
of late bine soe extreme ill, y=t= those y=t= ware neere him was
doubtfull of his recouerie; and allthough it is in these partes
ill trauelling in y=e= winter sesone, y=et= I doe intend to goe
and see him, and to leaue my chilldren att my howse in y=e= Hage
vntill my retorne, for there is noe venturing to take them w=th=
me; but my resolution is to come suddinelie bake againe. Thus,
w=th= my prayers vnto the Allmightie to presarue y=o= and all
yo=rs= in these dangerous times from
<P 305>
all calamities, I commit yo vnto His protection, and rest Yo'
most affectshonatt sister to my end,
   Anna Meautys.
Hage, y=e= 5=th= of Jenuary, y=e= nue stile, 1644.
   To my most deare and much honoured sister, the Lady Bacon,
att Culford.



<B COSIN>

[^THE CORRESPONDENCE OF JOHN COSIN, D.D. LORD BISHOP OF DURHAM:
TOGETHER WITH OTHER PAPERS ILLUSTRATIVE OF HIS LIFE AND TIMES.
PARTS 1 & 2. ED. BY ORNSBY, GEORGE. PUBLICATIONS OF THE SURTEES
SOCIETY 52, 55. 1868, 1870.^]

<Q COS 1617 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,1>
[} [\I. - LETTER FROM OLIVER NAYLOR TO JOHN COSIN.\] }] 
   Mr. Coosen,
If you have any mind to receive and to send commendations so
farre, I could wish it might be us'd betwixt us. On my part I
would be very glad of it that I might keepe my remembrance where
I am so much beholding, and howsoever I shall have but little
newes to requite your letters with, yett myne shall contayne
testimonie of a true affection which I shall alwayes beare you.
I have heard from Cambridge of Mr. Simpson's last sermon. If
that or any thing about that cause be worth your writing, I pray
you lett me heare. I am in a place of very good contentment, but
so farre is a banishment. I have one good benefite of a verie
choyce librarie, and my Lord of Bath hath intent to increase it
dailie, as the mart shall afford any choyce bookes. If this next
Catalogue have any in Divinitie which you shall here commended,
I pray you send me the names, that I
<P I,2>
may procure them. For they have us'd hitherto to trust the
judgement of a booke-binder in Paule's Church-yard, who sends
what he would. Remember my service to your Lord, unto whome I
shall allwayes acknowledge my selfe in all humble duty bound.
The carriers that bring letters this way lie at the Starre in
Breadstreete. They sett forth every Saturday in the morning. You
must enquier for Barstable carriers, and direct your letters to
me at the Earle of Bath's in Tawstocke. If you receive this
letter I pray you returne answere. And so with commendations to
yourself and Mr. Rhoane, I commend you both to God's protection.
   Your ever loving friend,
   Oliver Naylor.
   Tawstocke, 13 March, [\1616-17.\]
   If you will, heare of a church buisnes that is falne out
heere. There's one Allen in a towne cal'd South Moulton, not
farre from us, that hath christned a pott of ale lately, with
all the ceremonies belonging to a christning. His bell was a
candlesticke, his funt a salt-seller, two duble juggs the
gossips, and a dozen juggs more the witnesses. He us'd the verie
wordes of our lyturgie, and, least any thing should be wanting,
he had gossips' feast when he had done. He is thought to have
don it in derision of our ceremonies and relligion. For he came
late out of Portugall, and hath bene perswading divers young men
to returne thether with him. He is falne into a noble Bishop's
hands that stands for the Church. I have sent Mr. Allen woord,
for name's sake.
   To my very loving frend Mr. Coosen, at the Bishop of
Lichfeld's in St. Austin fryers neere the Exchange.

<Q COS 1617 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,2>
[} [\II. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM OLIVER NAYLOR
TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Good Mr. Coosen,
I cannot but thinke my selfe much beholding to your love that
interpret trouble kindnes, and, in what I may, I will endeavour
<P I,3>
to retaine that love which is so well disposed where it does
affect. I thanke you for the contents of your letter; it does me
much good to heare of these adventures, beeing so farre of from
them. I shall pray for your most worthy Lord's good successe,
and surely if the ball have written uppon it (\detur potiori\) ,
I know which way it will goe. I shall not trouble you for any
catalogue of the mart, for we are sure to have one sent from my
Lord's booke-binder, but for the choyce amongst them I shalbe
very glad to heare from you. You shall not feare the delivery of
your letters, for we never loose any which the carriers receive,
and for those which I send, I will either enclose them in my
sister's, or direct them to you at your Lord's. At this tyme I
have no newes to requite you, and writing by one of my Lord's
gentlemen, who is now readie to goe, I am fayne to make hast.
So with my best love and commendasions, I rest,
   Yours ever,
   Oliver Naylor.
   Ap. 13, [\1616-17.\]
   I pray you commend me to Mr. Roane.
   To my very loving frend Mr. Coosen, at the Reverend father
in God, the Bishop of Lichfield's, at St. Austin fryars.

<Q COS 1618 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,3>
[} [\III. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM OLIVER NAYLOR
TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Mr. Coosen,
I am wonderfull glad at your worthy Lord's good successe, and
congratulate our tymes in it where vertue sometymes prevayles. I
shall not fayle to pray for his prosperitie, and all your good
fortunes. I thanke you for the note of bookes you sent me. We
heare of a reconciling of opinions in the lowe countryes, or at
least of suppressing further writing. If the newes be seconded,
I pray you let me heare of it. If report hath not told the tale
allready at London you may receive this newes from hence of S=r=
Walter Raughly, that when he and his company
<P I,4>
came neere the river Oronoco, S=r=. Walter sent Captaine Kemish
with 4 ships in search of the myne, who by the way tooke a towne
of the Spaniards called St. Tome, and burnt it without any great
losse, only S=r=. Walter's sonne, breaking his ranks and running
before the company very disorderly (so our relation speakes of
him), was slaine. Captaine Kemish after, with 20 in his company,
undertooke the finding of the myne, and was absent 20 dayes from
them, which stay'd for him at St. Tome, taking tyme but for 5 or
6 dayes. He return'd without any tydings of it, pretending the
unusuall shallownes of the river that he could not goe so high.
S=r=. Walter lay'd great fault in him, as if he had not found it
through carelessnes, affirming by the Captaine's owne former
report (which should seeme to be the greatest round of this
viage) that it should not be above 3 miles from St. Tome,
shewing to the captaines and gentlemen a customebooke found at
the taking of St. Tome, where the King of Spain's customes in
particular were sett downe for those mynes. Captayne Kemish grew
sicke uppon the hard speeches S=r=. Walter gave him, and 10 days
after assay'd first to kill himselfe with a pistoll, but fayling
that way stab'd himselfe with a kniffe and died presently. The
captaines and gentlemen after his death desired to returne home,
as it should seeme beeing out of hope of that which they came
out for, and had leave of S=r=. Walter, who at 23 of March was
at St. Christopher's Iland, with an intent, as it seemes, to
keepe the seas; the rest of the ships beeing some 3 leagues from
him, and 2 of them bound for the New-found Lands, Captaine
Wallington and Captaine Whitny, who was of our College. This is
the summe of a long relation which my Lord received but this
weeke from Plymmouth, where one Tho. Barewicke, M=r=. of S=r=.
Walter Raughlye's ship was examined at his landing. If it be
stale newes yet it serves to make up my letter, and I had no
better choyce at this tyme. So agayne wishing all good fortune
and successe unto you, I rest,
   Your loving frend,
   Oliver Naylor.
   Tawstocke, 15 Maij, [\1618.\]
   I pray you remember me to Mr. Roane.
   To my very loving frend, Mr. John Coosen, at St. Aug.
Fryars, at the Reverend Father in God the B=pp=. of Norwich
house.

<Q COS 1618 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,5>
[} [\IV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM OLIVER NAYLOR
TO JOHN COSIN^]
(\S. in Christo.\)
   Good Mr. Coosen,
You bind me by a very kind office unto you. I would it lay in my
power to be answerable unto you; my indevor shall not be
wanting. But at this tyme I must needs be defective in
recompence of newes, which at this tyme our countrey affords
not, beeing only busied in harvest matters, and affording little
els but bad corne. I could have sent you S=r=. Walter Raughlie's
Apologie, but that I could not but conceive it to be common at
London, and he him selfe is nowe coming towards you, if he out
live his poysoning at Salsbury.
   I see the old fortune of the Court to be verified in your
newes, that 'tis a slippery place, though I wish our noble
Chancellour well for the justice he did us. I am most glad of
your Lord's undertaking of this controversie in the Church; and
doubt not but he will doe much good by his direction in it. I
heare of a briefe declaration he had published before, upon the
King's command, which should be frequent at Cambridge, but I
never saw it. Some heere have seene it, and (that you may have
some newes to be merry with) they say one Dr. Sharpe, that is
beneficed in this shere, hath carried a confutation of it up to
the Court. He was of King's College and by divers things he hath
done he is knowne to be one that dares play the foole in any
thing. If I happen on it you shall not fayle to receive it. So
with thankes for your kind letters, and desiring the continuance
<P I,6>
of them as you shall have occasion, I commend you to God's
protection.
   Your loving freind,
   Oliver Naylor.
   Tawst:[\ock\] , 7 Aug. [\1618.\]
   To my very loving frend, Mr. Coosen, at the Reverend father
in God the L=d=. B=pp=. of Norw=ch=., in St. Austin fryars.

<Q COS 1621 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,9>
[} [\VII. - FROM RICHARD MOUNTAGUE, CANON OF WINDSOR, &C., TO
JOHN COSIN.\] }] 
Good Jhon, I received the Homilies and Articles, yet I want the
Ordering of Bishops. That of Salomon (\factum bene\) ! If any
thing else nede disjunction, I give Duresme house (\jus\) and
leave to use me as they will, not so [^GREEK OMITTED^] (\et\)
[^GREEK OMITTED^] . I have sent alone the (\omissa\) in
Purgatory by my brother. I send you by this that to his Preface,
if (\videbitur\) : for otherwise it mattereth not. But, (\me
temerarium\) , that provokes enimyes on all sides, Puritans,
Papists, Lawyers, hell and all.
   (\Dulychii, Samiique, et quos tulit alta Zacynthus: Turba
ruunt in me - .\)
So you heare, so you say. But, of fellowship, let me knowe the
bug-beares, (\qui et quales\) , for (\jacta est alea\) . I am
redy not only to be bound but, [^GREEK OMITTED^] , to dye for
the Church, (\et vivam modo, plura dolebunt\) , if this be such
a [^GREEK OMITTED^] to them. Ther lawes I knowe not, Godd's lawe
I doe, and sacrilege was ever defined unto me to be robbing of
God in his due. I pray send me the parties and occasion of those
discourses. I can not tell when to see you till the booke be
don, viz. (\quam maturato`\) I pray. I could wish my Lord would
shewe the King that preface, it would relish him or distast him
happily [\haply\] before. The papers you speake of I can not yet
looke at, and, when I have, you can not be edified till I
decipher them. For the (\Diatribae\) , they may talke and think
as they will. No man ever stoped toungs. It is probable I was as
well able to go through the whole as the hardest part. If I were
not, yet [^GREEK OMITTED^] , but I could refute that surmise
were I disposed. The second parte lyeth by me (\effecta\)
almost. I have in a sort promised him, at least his frends, that
(\nihil ultra`\) , and unlesse enjoyned or provoked I must kepe
truth. If his Majesty will have me do it, go through with him
[^GREEK OMITTED^] , or handle the Q[\uestion\] according to
those three heads of the nature and right, use and practice,
abuse and sacrilege, I will. But I must not leave, you knowe,
his employment without his warrant. My Lord of Duresme may take
occasion to tell the King what is thretned me, and so understand
his minde for finishing the rest. I am willing enough to do it,
can it be don 
<P I,10>
fayrely and clerely. Well, howesoever I hope I shall never faile
the Church of England, but (\usque ad aras\) do my best to
uphold the doctrine and discipline ther. If this preface take
not, then kepe it by you till I come. (\Vale\) , and commend me
to your [^GREEK OMITTED^] ....
   Your assured
   Ri. Montagu.
   Windsore, Jan. 4. [\1621.\]
   [\ADDRESS TORN OFF.\]

<Q COS 1624 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,11>
[} [\VIII. - FROM OLIVER NAYLOR TO THE SAME.\] }] [^TO JOHN
COSIN^] 
   Mr. Coosin,
I received both your last letters together, for your first
beeing enclosed in one to Mr. Skippon lay heere a whole weeke in
his absence before I had it. I like the whole substance of your
Replie wonderfullie well, and if so be the senior fellowes keepe
from making any act against you, or sending any satisfaction to
your Lord, 'tis no matter what parlees they have amongst
themselves. But hinder that as much as you can by your letters,
that those which are for you joyne not in any thing with the
rest to the prejudice of the foundation. I have writt once more
to Mr. Wake to advice what he does. If failing of a dispensation
he will needs give over, lett him commend you for his successor
to the M=r= and fellowes, which being an ordinary curtisie in
all Colleges, will add something to their unkindnes which shall
withstand it, at least in your Lord's opinion. If you want tyme,
Mr. Wake may conceale his determination, staying at London,
which I beleeve will hinder the M=r=. a while from pronouncing
his place voyd: for he will not now be over hastie. I cannot
resolve uppon a suddaine whether it were better for you to
petition to the Chancellor for a stay and hearing of the
buisnes, or to get his letter for your selfe, or some other
great man's letter. The one certainely wilbe as easie as the
other, and perchance more effectuall for you. If you petition,
more must joyne, and the ground of it must be some injury
pretented to your places. This, if you fasten uppon all the
seniors, you will wrong your frends, if uppon the M=r= and some
of them you confirme divers against you, which perchance may be
wonne; besides you give an occasion that some will joyne with
the M=r=. in answere, who els in all likelyhoode will slip the
coller, and indeed this buisnes proceeding from himselfe alone
he may be thought worthy to be accus'd alone for setting up of
his kinsman against all equitie and practise of the College. So
it wilbe likely you shall only loose him whom I beleeve you have
lost allready. Yett a generall petition may be drawne, that
whereas Mr. Michels is a suiter in the College to succeed in the
senioritie against all equitie and right, it would please his
Lordship to write to the M=r=. and Fellowes that nothing be done
to the prejudice of your places, and against the custome and
practice of the College. The ground of your recourse to him must
be because he is supreme 
<P I,12>
Visiter of the College, unto whom the fellowes did allwayes
bring their greevances, and by whom they have had so many and so
honorable redresses. But if, uppon consideration, you find this
course troublesome and chargeable, you may thinke uppon some
letter for your selfe, which if it comes from one that must be
respected, it will not only make a stop, but effect something on
your behalfe, pleading only your woorth and your degree, and the
esteeme that your Lord and the Universitie hath of you, and that
they would not by a contrary election give an example so much
against all equitie and former custome. If a letter to this
effect could be gotten presently, your petition may followe
after as you see occasion, and if you gett the Chancellor's
letter you shall have more cause to come to him againe. But lett
your letter or petition be joyntly both to M=r=. and fellowes,
and hold you, if you can, to that, that some above heare it, and
not the heads of the College, for (\manus manum fricat\) . My
Lord of Rochester were excellent for that business, whose letter
perchaunce may be presently gott for you, and having done that
kindnes which he hath to the College, it will certainly be much
respected, at least it will give a stop till you be fullie
provided. I doe not thinke, if your frends stand firme, that any
devolution wilbe made, for the fellowes will never loose their
right of election, only they will strayne curtisie who should
yeeld to an other, but if yours will hold out there is no feare.
And if any of your frends would but make a protestation in the
Chappell against the election of any of the .... and require of
the Register to make an act of it, it may be it would doe some
good. But (\consilium in arena`\) , a hundred things may happen
to advantage the cause, which, if they will but watch and take,
a few will doe more then the greater number which are not so
resolute. I do fullie agree with you in this, that the M=r=.
would have Michels made by the fellowes, and if he cannot
prevayle that way, he will not be seene in it. Therefore plie
that quarter whatsoever you doe els. If you be not over buisy
write a line or 2 every weeke, and I will not fayle to answere.
The .... petition to the .... must serve to prove this, that
they did acknowledge heretofore that they had not the same
priviledges with the foundation, and that before the .... gave
over their right, they themselves did make account they were not
to succeed. If this be not question'd
<P 13>
you may conceale it. Howsoever lett not my hand be seene. I
thanke you for the .... you sent, and am sorry to heare our
convocation should be any way misinclined, but I hope it is but
some of them. I pray you send me that Gag, for we have it not
heere; only we heare much speaking of it. I thanke you likewise
for your newes from both places, and I pray you sometyme
remember your occurrences there, especially those of the
convocation. For thence we shall heare nothing, unlesse it be
from your selfe. So wishing you all good successe, and, without
any further complement, desirous to doe you any good office, I
rest, 
   Yours ever, 
   Oliver Naylor.
   Tawst:[\ocke,\] 19 March, [\1623-4.\] 
   It were not amisse if you sollicited Mr. Stokys to be absent
at the election, which he may easilie doe by pretending some
buisnes abroad.
   To my verie worthie frend, Mr. John Cosin, at Duresme house
in the Strond.

<Q COS 1624 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,15>
[} [\X. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM OLIVER NAYLOR
TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Mr. Coosin,
That which I writt of prae-elections is most certayne. They have
no warrant nor foundation in the Statute, nor can any custome
make them good, because there is a Statute to this effect, that
no custome against the Statutes should be of force. I am
likewise fullie perswaded that if the meanes should be used in
tyme, this prae-election would take no effect, because the Mr.
and Fellowes may be enfors't to choose againe when a place
shalbe voyd, and otherwayes then they have prae-elected. But I
hold not so fitt that you should proceed by the way of Mandat,
unlesse it may be gott verie easilie. If it may be so, it were
not amisse that you were senior fellowe, though but a short
tyme, for other things that depend on it, as I have heretofore
told you. And certaynly this would bring them to a new election,
and restrayne them to a new person. Though the other course by
the Chancellor will prove the easier, and it may be likewise
effectuall. For if you can gett your owne Lord and my Lord of
Rochester to assist the Chancellor, you shall make knowne the
right of your succession, what wrong you have hitherto suffer'd
in want of your admissions, and how farre this prae-election is
against the Statutes; and it may be in all of them you shall
have redresse. Besides, you may gett there an Order made for
succession, such as may be reasonable and conscionable, which if
you can doe, you shall doe a perpetuall good to the College by
taking away differencies in heereafter in elections, and by
giving some libertie unto the poore junior fellowes, who, as
they are now, are slaves to the vices and defects of the
seniors, and not only beare with all indignities, but, as you
knowe, are fayne to be pertakers of unseemly courses. If you goe
this way, you must suddainly gett out inhibition from the
Chancellor to the Mr. and Fellowes, that they make no election
<P I,16>
unto any place that is or shalbe voyd, until the right of
succession and other greevances of Franckland's foundation be
heard and examin'd, and some day appoynted for the hereing of it
by the Chancellor himselfe at London, unto which they bring
likewise these Statutes, the donation of your places, and
especially the Annales. It must be heard at London in any case,
not at Cambridge, and you must be furnished for the right of
your succession, and of the unlawfullnes of this prae-election.
I thinke one thing must needs fall out by it, that, either in
this or in the next election, they will give your Lord
satisfaction in your selfe. But, if Mr. Husband give over before
you, gett an inhibition: (which is much to be feared, especially
if they heare at Cambridge of any stirring against them) there
is no possibilitie of overthrowing the new election which shalbe
made when the place is voyd, and if it be so allready, or shalbe
so, all you can doe is to do some good for the tyme to come,
which if you can doe conveniently, and without much trouble, it
wilbe woorth your labour; but you have no reason to undergoe
either much charges or much trouble. Further then this I see not
to be done, for as for your appeale, if you gett an inhibition,
you shall have no use of it; and if they make a new election
when the place shalbe voyd, the appeale for the prae-election
will not serve the turne, unlesse they make no new election,
which if they should not doe, the former prae-election and
admission will not be enough, and in that case it devolves to
the Mr. after the first month, and, I thinke, after the second
month unto the Chancellor. And this you may secretly inquire
after, if there be allready, or when there shalbe an admission
past, whether they made a new election, or no, (\per viam
scrutinii\) . The Parlament would certainly referre this cause
to the Visitors, if you should bring it there, and ten to one
Dr. Caius' Visitors would come in, the Provost of King's, and
the Mr. of Bennet, and the Senior Phisition; therefore, if you
doe stirre in it, goe to the Chancellor, that you may stand
something uppon even ground. You must resolve suddenly, and I
would it were, as I could wish, in my power to give you
assistance: but being no fellowe amongst them I can but wish
well, and I dare not write to any but your selfe about it in
regard of the Dr., whome I am loth to discontent at the parting.
Though I feare me my letters would doe little amongst them; a
man is so soone forgotten when he is gon, that now since I came
last from London I received not one letter from Cambridge,
though I have written, I thinke, ten thither. But let not these
things trouble you, whatsoever the successe of them be: you must
and shall find rubbs in the world, in the justest and equallest
cause. The attempt was honest and worthy, and amongst them that
are so I dare say
<P I,17>
they will have more discredit in their conquest then you in the
crosse. We heare of divers accusations against my Lord of
Norwich, agreable, for the most part, to your relation; but I
doubt not but he will quitt himselfe sufficiently. Mr. Montague
is every where with his Gagger, like a gyant against a pigmy. I
could .... wish't him a stronger adversary .... this perchance
may provoke some of the Triarean bond. I doe not wonder that
some are offended, but God's blessing on his hart for redeeming
our Church from those scandalls that Kelliston and the rest layd
upon us, and were never yett answer'd by any of the Sutcliffes.
I pray God send him the hart and leysure to doe the like for the
primitive Church against Baronius. It would be a woorke of all
others of the highest merritt for the protestant Church. I have
not yett gon through the Vindication of Causobon, but certaynly
by that I have read you need not doubt but the impostore is dead
and buried with all men of understanding; for the rest, they are
not to be regarded who will not be perswaded though they be
never so well perswaded. I pray you commend me to Mr. Wake, when
you chance to see him; for I
<P I,18>
thinke he and I have given over writing letters one to an other,
wheresoever the fault is. So with my best wishes for you, I
rest,
   Yours ever,
   Oliver Naylor.
   Tawst:[\ocke,\] 21 Maij, 1624.
   To my very worthy freind, Mr. John Coosin, at Durham howse
in the Strand.

<Q COS 1624 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,18>
[} [\XI.- FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM OLIVER NAYLOR
TO JOHN COSIN^]
(\S. ab Authore Salutis.\)
   Mr. Coosin,
You may well thinke that I wonder at these proceedings in the
College. It was once firmely resolv'd uppon by all the fellowes
that none but those which were incorporated into the College,
and were chosen by the M=r=. and fellowes, should succeed into
the senioritie; and to that purpose both my selfe and divers
others indevour'd that ... might give over their right unto his
fellowships, and that a decree of succession might be made to
take away future doubt and difference when any senior place
should be voyd. But that succeeding not, (which for myne owne
part I allwayes thought the safest course for the peace of the
College,) I cannot but wonder at this new intent that the
fellowes will make choyce out of their owne foundation. It may
be they send you woord of that which is suspected, not of that
which is intended, or at most an offer may be made a farre off,
to see how the company would be inclined, or whether Frankland's
foundation would lett it passe easilie. The best of it is Mr.
Wake's place is nott in his owne power, and I am perswaded he
will not give an occasion of so much wrong as this wilbe. For
your owne proceeding in it you shall have my advice as I heare
from you, so I may relie uppon your seccresie that no man living
shall knowe of it. As yett the egg is but hatching, and you do
well not to take notice of it. But inquire who of the company
wilbe certaine for the foundation, and who stand as neuters.
Gett likewise a coppie of Dr. Perse's will, so farre as
concernes his places, with the first decree in the College of
acceptance, and the record they made when you were chosen. Mr.
Allen and Mr. Bachcroft, I thinke, have them all. Gett likewise
the Persians' petition to the fellowes, and the fellowes'
answere to it; for in them both themselves and the fellowes did
acknowledge that they had no right of succession before they
were incorporated. Make not your selfe in any case a head
<P I,19>
of the buisnes, nor trouble not your Lord your selfe in it,
because it is not your owne course to succede, but lett Mr.
Warden followe it, if there be occasion. Mr. Wake shall
certainly give you a quarter of a yeare's warning beforehand
what he meanes to doe with his place, but that likewise you must
keepe secrett. If you speake with Dr. Goslin lett it be done in
all faire manner, and request only that he would not give that
example in his tyme that any should be chosen into the senior
place that is not incorporated into the College, nor chosen by
the M=r=. and fellowes.
   I thanke you for your newes, and for the name of the author
you sent me, which I thinke I shall gett heere. All remember
themselves kindly unto you who are of your acquaintance. So
expecting sometymes to heare from you, I rest,
   Yours ever,
   Oliver Naylor.
   13 June. [\1624.\]
   I thinke I come not to London till towards Michaelmas. But I
will send you shortly more certayne woord.
   Since I writt that before, I understand Mr. Skippon hath bene
at Cambridge, whose meeting was one of the principall ends of my
jorny there so soone. But since I have fayl'd of that,
unfortunately, I purpose not, as farre as I yett know, to come
your way till towards Michaelmas. I have heard something
likewise that confirmes your letter about the former buisness,
but gett the writings I have nam'd unto you, and lett me
understand what further is intended and done, and I will not
fayle, God willing, to returne answere. Yett allwayes remember
that the small places in the Universities are rather hindrances
then helpes, and followe your hopes with your Lord, and use him
rather in those things that will stand by you, then these things
you must leave. So he advices you that wishes and prayes for as
much good for you as any frend you have in England.
   Oliver Naylor.
   To my very loving frend, Mr. John Coosin, at Durham howse in
the Strand.

<Q COS 1624 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,19>
[} [\XII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM OLIVER NAYLOR
TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir,
I thinke I acquainted you the last summer with the tenents of a
Puritan heere amongst us, who, amongst other things, defended
that there was no ordinarie meanes of salvation in that
congregation
<P I,20>
that had only the publique prayers, the reading of Scriptures
and the reading of homilies, the administration of the
Sacraments, &c., concluding nothing to be avaylable that way,
but only the hearing of sermons, and such likewise as they made.
Divers oppos'd him, but amongst the rest one Mr. John Downe,
sometyme fellow of Emmanuell College, gave so great satisfaction
in a sermon at a Visitation, that his fellow ministers have
persuaded him to publish the same, thinking he will doe much
good both heere and in other places by it. He purposes to send
it to London by Mr. Skippon to Mr. Blunt, about a fortnight
hence, and having not acquaintance there to have a litle care of
the comming forth of it, he intreated me to write to some about
it, and you see I have made bold to do so to you, requesting
your furtherance in it, if Mr. Skippon (as I thinke he will) doe
come unto you. The gentleman is a verie learned scholler, to
whome you shall doe the kindnes, of whome I thinke Dr. Lindsel
can tell you, being of that note in Cambridge that he answered
the Act at St. Marie's when he commenc'd Bachelor of Divinitie.
But besides him you shall oblige my selfe, and divers others,
who are verie desirous of the comming forth of the Sermon. So
having not any newes to send you from this corner of the world,
I commend you to God's protection, and rest
   Yours ever,
   Oliver Naylor.
   Marwoodd, 11 Maij. [\1624.\]
   To my verie worthie freind, Mr. John Coosin, at Durham house
in the Strond, these.

<Q COS 1624 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,22>
[} [\XIV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
Ihon, I sent you last weeke, by my brother Scul, a schedule as
much as came to my hands of Puritan collections against my
booke, contraring, as they say, the Articles and Homilies. I
suppose Dr. Prideux did collect them; att leastwise I believe
Featley can tell the author. Prideux hath thretned to write
against me. (\Utinam.\) But I thinck he distrusteth himself at
his pen. For he saide to my Lord of Oxford, as Ed: Boughen told
me, that though I were a good scholer at my pen, and wrote well,
yet he doubted not but att an argument he could plunge me. The
man thincketh well of him self, yet if K. James please I dare
looke him in the face in his owne scholes. But lett him passe
for a Puritan, yet God graunt he, nor any such, come to the
Bishop of Glocester, who is, they say, dead. My Lord of S.
David's must nowe and in such cases putt for the Church with the
Duke, and use his greate creditt, that we be not swallowed up
with a Puritan Bishopriqry. I was once purposed to have told him
howe graciously the Duke used me att Windsore last St. George's
day, and that (\motu proprio\) . He bad me rely upon him, and
none but him, and lett him knowe what preferment I desired, and
I should have it. And that he spake not as a courtier, but as my
reall, true and constant friend. I have had no opportunity since
to speake with him. I have no acquaintance in his house. I am
not like in hast to troble him by plunging upon any thing, if my
Lord of S. David's, you relating this unto him, will do me the
favour, as att next opportunity, to remember my service unto his
Grace, and to putt him in minde of his gracious promise, and to
lett him understand that I am att his Grace's service, where, or
when, or howsoever he shalbe pleased to dispose of me, I shall
rest beholding to his Lordship, and happily [\haply\] the Church
shall loose nothing by it. If not, I am contented, being, I
thanke God, well provided for in my private estate, and better
then I should be were I a Bishop, which I would not undertake
but for the Churche's sake, and with greater countenance to
oppose the Puritans, and be the freer from every skip-jack's
opposition and censure.
   I do purpose to write the Gagg anew, both because in a second
edition the author hath altered, detracted, augmented much, as
<P I,23>
also because I would answere my detractors; therfore, as I wrote
to you, I would my Lord of Duresme would procure of my Lord
Keper my answere to Yates and Ward, and either shewe it the
King, or send it me to reveiwe.
   Commend me to Lindsell, and bid him remember his promise
concerning Dr. Combers. I purpose to go upon Saturday next, God
willing, to Pettworth. If you write not till then direct your
letter thether. (\Vale.\) God kepe his Church.
   Your assured,
   R. Mountagu.
   Windsore, Octob. 24. [\1624.\]
   To the w=ll=. my most respected freind, Mr. Ihon Cosens,
Chaplyn to the Reverend L. B. of Durham, att his house, be
this.

<Q COS 1624 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,23>
[} [\XV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Honest Mr. Cosen,
I thanck you as allwayes and ever, so for your last
advertisements. For those Oxford braggarts I feare them not;
ther pens nor pratinge. As for that princox you speake of, the
pore puny may happily [\haply\] hereafter barke, his biting I
expect not: only it angers [{me{] they prate so much and
performe so little. If he can doe so much there is paper enough
in Oxford to scribble on. He knoweth my woning, lett me se what
he can say. Though he
<P I,24>
print it not here he may beyond seas. Att least in private he
may send it to me, or meete me somewhere, that I may feele (\qui
vir fiet\) . Empty casks sound loudest. But the Parliament must
back him or he can not stand. (\Evohe!\) I hope King James will
stand to me, or lett us try it out. If you knowe any that will
tell him agayne, bid him say to him from me that if he hath any
thing to say to me I will answere him. Howsoever, (\quod
scripsi, scripsi\) . I have sent for my papers from my Lord
Keper, and have them: therefore let your Lord supersede from
asking. When I have don, if he will shewe it the King, I will
send them to him, if not, so. I will kepe them agaynst
imployment, and for my self and friends. I am, God willing, for
Pettworth (\cras\) . Therefore hereafter, (\si quid opus\) ,
direct your letters thether from Chaucer's Inne, the Tabard, in
Southwerk. Upon Wensday morning our carrier setteth out. I will
remember you to one that doth not a little bragg of you. Our Dr.
Goodman I knowe would have Glocester, and is gon up about it
upon Wensday last, but sent his man instantly upon report of the
decease of Milo Smith. But I pray God he misse it, if it be as I
heare that a Scottishman must come to us (\per saltum\) . I hope
Dr. Theodore Price shall have it, who is as much talk'd of, and
altogether att my Lord Keper's. I am sure he loveth the Church,
and is a wise man. For my Lord of S. D[\avid's\] about the
particular I wrote, I merveile not. I smell a ratt. But I hope
to see him one day where he will both do and say for the Church.
(\Interim\) , if someways he concede, I blame him not. (\Dulce
est desipere in loco.\) No more att present but God blesse you.
I am booted and can not enlarge.
   Send this inclosed I pray to my brother ...
   (\Tuissimus\) ,
   R. Mountagu.
   Oct=rbr= 30. [\1624.\]
   [\ADDRESS TORN OFF.\]

<Q COS 1624 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,25>
[} [\XVI. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Good Mr. Cosen,
I have my answere with me, and am disposing of it by adding what
hath come to my hands since, changing, &c. So soone as I have
don, and I will make all possible hast, I will send it you. I
am somewhat hinder'd, for att my returne to Pettworth upon
Saturday I found your little wife very sick, and since she hath
been at death's dore, nor is yet well. An empostume brake in
her. The bagg is come up, I thanke God. But she compleyneth of
her head and stomacke much. The remaynes are, I feare, behind.
If you can meet with Sir Wm. Paddy remember me to him, and
desire his advise what to do. We have no phisitions in theise
parts worth a beane. God hath ben her best phisition, or she had
died. I would gladly have those reliques disperst. The
empostumation was in her stomacke. Before it came up she bled
much at nose. Yet by snatches I do procede to perfect my
answere, which is so written that my Lord may well showe it unto
the King, unto whom for better addresse I will direct and
dedicate it. I can not inlarge. If you have any newes lett us
have them. (\Vale.\)
   Your assured,
   Ri. Mountagu.
   Pettworth, Nov. 4. [\1624.\]
   To the w=r=.shipfull my very especiall good freind, Mr. Ihon
Cosen, att Durham house, be this.

<Q COS 1624 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,25>
[} [\XVII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Good honest Mr. Cosen,
I shall send you my answere, I hope, the next weeke unto my
Informers, though composed (\tempore saevissimo\) . My little
Mall hath ben desperately sicke ever since my returne from
Windsore,
<P I,26>
and whether you shall ever see her more in this world or I enjoy
her long I can not tell. I feare no. God must worke wonders if
so. My joy, my greife! Till that come I send you this, a part of
my answere to Bulenger for Mr. Casaubon. If you like it and you
can gett it printed do. It will [{be{] a book it self, though it
be not the half of what I have don. Commend me to Dr. Lindsell,
though I thinke he hath forgotten me. Tell him his hostesse, a
widow by the way, at Chichester, is in love with the impresse
and motto of his ring. (What passed (\inter partes\) then?) She
desireth a sample to make one for her self, and desired my wife,
being at Chichester last weeke about my child, to procure. This
in breife. I am in the house of mourning, therefore I can not
laugh. You and my Lord of St. David's may. If you write, lett me
have some newes, (\de\) Bishoprickes and Denryes, and who it was
would have putt my L[\ord\] K[\eeper\] out of Westminster
lately, for so we heard at Pettworth. (\Vale.\)
   Your assured,
   R. M.
   Nov. 14. [\1624.\]
   Our newes is that Sir R. Weston shalbe Lord tresurer.
(\Faxit.\) So if so, good Jhon, use all the strength you can to
bring my brother Jh. Scull into his house. Will. Lakes, you
knowe, can do all with him, and Will, I hope, will do any thing
for us. (\Interest Ecclesiae\) to have some of our side in such
places, and he wilbe no great charge, being beneficed in towne.
   To the w=ll=. my worthie frind, Mr. Ihon Cosen, att Duresme
house.

<Q COS 1624 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,30>
[} [\XX. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
Indeed your newes was heavy! Dan. Berkhead dead! (\Publica res,
virtutis honos, Ecclesiae vindex luget in interitu, mi Daniele,
tuo.\) He was my elder acquaintance then Austen himself, and
might, (\si Leo visum\) , have lived (\inter paucos\) to have
don the Church service in a croked and perverse generation. We
are behind, yet shall we goe to him. He shall not come to us,
and now remembreth both the Church against Papist and Puritan
unto his Maker, and us his relicts unto our Redeemer. (\Requiem
aeternam\) unto that blessed soull. My afflictions, I thanck
God, have (\lucida intervalla\) , but (\subinde recurrunt\) . My
wife is now
<P I,31>
downe, though, I praise God, not sorely sick. We are in a most
helthfull place, yet I intend not in hast to winter here agane,
[^GREEK OMITTED^] . The Austen, if you thinck it a good one, I
pray send me. Whatsoever it cost, I must not want that of all,
and I will either by my Lord of Northumberland's steward, or one
of our towne, returne you the mony next weeke. I am loth to send
it, our wayes are very dangerous betwixt Guilford and London.
   For the Bibliotheca they do so play the knaves in printing,
that I can not tell what to resolve, for in [{the{] Paris
edition much is wanting that is in Colen, and (\vice versa`\) .
Fayne would I have one, but till our Lady day I can not spare
mony neither, and I will go no more upon score, for they will
make me pay derer. If Fetherston will undertake it at Frankford
to be printed, it wilbe well enough: but then what if I add the
other part to, for cost is all one to them. The only defect
wilbe there may be defects in the copie, which at presse may be
espied by a stranger rather then the compiler; for I reading my
owne things often lett faults passe, as knowing what they should
be, and so reading them (\minus attente`\) when as they are not
so written. Besides, if there should be a doubt, they can not
consult the author, but things must be as they may, if not as we
would. I like it well to have it don so, but then Austen and you
read it over first, and lett me knowe whether he will undertake
for all, and when, and what copies he will assure. If he be as
good as his word, I have don with Lownes, and perchance may be
worth 100=li=. to him one day.
   I am glad your clogg is gon. It is good for you, and wilbe
more for his advantage farr. Cockering hath (\tantu`m non\)
marred him. To write unto my Lord wilbe nowe to late: for if he
will shewe it at all, he hath don it by this, and though he had
no letter will say he had, for so he hath some time don. Your
directions wilbe as good as if I had written, but yet if you
will have me write by the next, I will. Send me word whether I
shall direct the 7=li=. to you or Fetherston, and if to him, att
what signe. It would be to much troble for you, being so far of.
   Your assured,
   R. M.
   Decemb. 6. [\1624.\]
   To the w=ll=. my most respected freind, Mr. Ihon Cosen,
Chaplen to the L. B. of Durham, att Durham house, be this.

<Q COS 1624 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,32>
[} [\XXI. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Good Ihon, (\Salutem in Christo.\)
You did well to black lead your booke. I had not the patience,
though I would have had the leysure, to read the blew-coate
through. Casaubon the author of such bald stuff! (\Credat
Judaeus Apella.\) Though his minde had ben that way 20 yeares
since, when he was chin deepe (\in lacu Lemanno\) , yet his
learning could not disgorge such dorbellismes. (\Non vidi
magis.\) What this Abraham Darcie is I can not tell. I supposed
him some masked Puritan. Had he his due his bookes should fire
him att a stake. Before God it will never be well till we have
our Inquisition. Jos. Hall to commend this! Were it (\res mei
juris\) , he should loose all promotions he hath for it, as he
that licensed it. (\Bene sit\) to my Lord of Durham and you for
disveyling this Andabatarian Puritan, but (\O si\) you could
persuade his Majestie to take strict order that these
Allobrogicall dormise should not so much as peepe out in corners
or by owlelight. This riff-raff rascalls make us lyable to the
lash unto our other adversaries of the Church of Rome, who
impute the frantick fitts and froth of every Puritan paroxysme
to the received doctrine of our Church, as this beboone doth
with whome I have had lately to do, S=r= Goose the Gagger, if
you have seene him; to whom I have shapen this answere I send
you: nott (\sponte\) , but [^GREEK OMITTED^] . About some 20
months since some of the Romish Limitors had come within my
pale, and ben tampering with some wooman att Stanford Rivers.
Understanding, therof I blanched them and settled the partie.
But they came agayne, and she to me. Whereupon, after other
resolution to her, I said that I desired to speake with them,
for I was willing to lerne, and to save my soull, if I were
amiss, as well as they. Wherfore, if they would not come to
conferre with me, I desired resolution in thre propositions
which I gave her written, promising to subscribe and go to
masse, if in them they could persuade me. They went to the
quick. She gave them to the parties. I heard no more of them
till the 5 of October last. Then she cometh to me and bringeth
me from one A. P., who or what I know not, 2 sheets of paper,
written in 2 severall hands, often without sense, without true
ortographie, nothing to my propositions: only I had directions
to addresse my self to one Mr. May,
<P I,33>
in Partridg ally in Holborne, lately [\BLANK IN MS.\] and
Minister, but nowe a Catholique, and he would eyther satisfie me
or provide one that should. This missive I answered presently,
as I thought fitt, and left it with her that wrought me the
paper, who said the partie promised to come againe within 4
days. But he is not yet come I understand. He also sent me a
little whipjack in a blew jackett, caled (^A Gagg for the newe
Gospell^) , that eyther I should be converted by it, or answere
it. This choice I was putt to. It was not like to convert me.
Had I not ben settled, it would have fastned me. I have seen
many foolish things in that kinde, but never sawe more, therfore
answere it I must, unlesse I would [^GREEK OMITTED^] , and
answere it I have, though (\poteram has horas non sic 
perdere\) , and that [^GREEK OMITTED^] ; bitterly and tartly I
confesse, which I did purposely, because the asse deserved so to
be rub'd. This I send to you. Read it over privately, or att
most with Austen, and gett it licensed, but of no Puritan. (\Non
eminu`s patientur\) , for I must print it. It is noised abroad
that such a thing came to me: and he is held, which I wonder,
even of schollers, [^GREEK OMITTED^] . I purpose, God willing,
to se you next weeke, then (\fusiu`s ista\) . In the meane time
forgett not this masked Puritan, if it be possible, to have some
exemplary punishment inflicted on him. You se howe, 
(\utrinque\) , we are putt to it. God looke on his Church, and
preserve it. (\Vale.\) 
   Your assured
   Ri. Mountagu.
   Windsore,
   Decemb: 12. [\1624.\]
   To the w=ll=. my very loving frend, Mr. Ihon Cosen, att my
Lord of Durham's house, this.

<Q COS 1624 ONAYLOR>
<A OLIVER NAYLOR>
<G M>
<P I,38>
[} [\XXIV. - FROM OLIVER NAYLOR TO THE SAME.\] }] [^TO JOHN
COSIN^]
   Good Sir,
I writt divers tymes to Mr. Pagett this last terme to knowe of
your returne, with purpose to have written to you, but I had not
any certaintie of your beeing at London before your owne letters
came. I am most hartly glad of the newes they bring of the
bettering of your fortune so much, which I doubt not but will
continue by your indevours under so worthy a Lord, who is so
constant in his favour to those which shall deserve it. No frend
you have shall be more joyfull then my selfe at it. The giving
over of your place at Cambridge was wonderfull well, and as it
became you, that they may have some examples of free elections
amongst the contrary. And for the partie I thinke my selfe
someway indebted to you for him for the good will I bare him,
who will shame neither of our judgments, if he continue as he
was. Though I wonder the D=r=. could not see the creditt of the
College before you open'd his eyes, or perchaunce he would have
you have the creditt of so good a woorke now in the great
reconcilement. Howsoever 'tis woorth a hundred [\...\] to leave
a good successor amongst them. And for his frendship it is now a
great deale more to be esteemed when you shall not have the
former occasions to yeeld to any inconveniences for it. It may
be I shall see them this Commencement, though I still demurre
uppon it.
   'Tis true that I have some motions of mariage heere in hand,
though nothing yett be concluded: which the condition of the
world hath inclin'd me to against my former resolutions; but
such are these necessities and conveniencies which no man can
imagine but by experience. You shall heare of the successe
whatsoever it be.
<P I,39>
   Mr. Wake is heere at Sherburne, and writes as if all were
well, but he plays now the cheefest part that ever he did, and I
beleeve his Lord sent for him to have some knowledge of him. I
pray God keepe him in good order.
   I cannot requite you with any newes from hence, but only
thanke you for that which you send, which I shalbe verie much
beholding to you for, especially for that which concernes our
Church. I have long differ'd my buisnes concerning Offerd Darcy.
If you remember the cause, I pray you send me your advice in it.
So with all good wishes unto you, I rest
   Yours ever,
   Oliver Naylor.
   Tawst:[\ocke.\] 31 Dec. [\1624.\]
   To my much respected frend, Mr. John Coosin, att Duresme
howse, in the Strand.

<Q COS 1625 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,42>
[} [\XXVII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
It was ill don of the Deane to communicate the papers,
especially to one of the faction, as that D=r=. is. By that
meanes the Brethren, I make no doubt, will have intelligence,
and so (\Ambubaiarum collegia, pharmacopolae, etc. quem non
movebunt fumum!\) In that of Justification (\cum appendiciis\)
is the mayne betwixt them and us. I knowe the Deane is
(\animitu`s\) of our minde, but [^GREEK OMITTED^] . I have
<P I,43>
a passage, I thincke, in the point, out of him, to purpose, and
for that the justification of a sinner consisteth in forgiveness
of sins, and not imputed iniquity, primarily, and in grace
infused into the heart, secondarily, whereby man is inabled to
abandon his wicked courses by mortifying of his inward man, I se
no reason but it may well passe. For, ever, where sin is not
imputed, but iniquity pardoned, holy life and conversation will
appeare and shewe itself, which to my understanding David
taught, Psal. li. 10. (^Hide thy face from my sinne, and blott
out all myne iniquityes^) , which being don, then ensuieth,
(^Create in me a cleane heart, O God, and renue a right spiritt
within me^) . And so are they coupled 1 Cor. vi. 11. And so,
according to antiquity, sinns are not only pardoned but the
guift of sanctity is conferred. Nor only so, but according unto
them whom theise men do followe in the point of justification,
who seeme most averse unto sanctification or renovation, [^LATIN
OMITTED^] . For theise men, Calvin and Beza I meane, do
acknowledge and confesse that Justification and Sanctification
are perpetually conjoyned, and do mutually cohere, nor can they
be separated the one from the other. Justification comprehendeth
whatsoever we obtayne by Christ, imputation of his righteousness
and sanctification, saith Beza, in Tit. iii. 7. This, I take it,
is the doctrine of the Church of England, to which the Doctor,
if he understand himself, hath subscribed. I am sure it is Mr.
Deane's. (\Tenete quod subtantia est, alterate quod accidens
est.\) You are of my minde, all. Do it for me in disposing the
chapters as you would do it for yourselves. Change what you
will, so you hold the mayne. Touching Images, that opinion of
myne in the 2 chapter, it is myne still, though you have said as
much as can be. But for that, [^GREEK OMITTED^] . I stand not
upon it. Change it as you will. Touching the publishing of it,
sone or late, all is one to me. Your owne leisure and occasions
take them. (\Sat cito` si sat bene`\) , and, (\si sat bene`\) ,
no matter (\quam tarde`\) .
   Remember my service to my Lord, and tell him what I write I
referre all to you: yet I would gladly see the Dr.'s
observations,
<P I,44>
before or after, I care not. For I will alter nothing contrary
to your opinions, trust me in that. I have revised over my booke
agayne, tell my Lord, as I onc told the Archbishop I would, when
the K[\ing\] sent me to him. I thinck the impression is out. If
you will have it reprinted, or desire to see it you shall. It is
little for their advantage, and yet I thinck taketh away most of
their objections. For I have explaned, added, inforced the
points in that (\cordolium\) touching faling away from grace. I
have roundly, flattly, and breifly acknowledged it the Church
doctrine, and so left it, only reporting the words of the
Articles and Homilyes, leaving out the Testimonies and Articles.
If his Grace call for it he shall have it, little to his
comfort. If not, [^GREEK OMITTED^] . For Lorinus you may stay.
If my Lord of Northumberland have him, I care not for him. I
will enquire, and if not, then desire him. Dr. Crakanthorp's
booke I thought had ben out long since. I am greatly, it semeth
by you, in his booke. I merveile the overseers lett it passe. I
do not merveile att him for writing so, because the man was a
good, ingenuous scholer, though mislead. But whie do you call it
a posthume booke? Is the author dead? I knowe not so much. I am
sory for it, because a good Archbishop might have made good use
of him, and such one one day we may have. You have sent me newes
indeed, good, but strange. I am glad that the Lord Brooke hath
at length began to remember Cambridge. I hope it wilbe better
imployed then the donations are att Oxford. This advantage we
have, to amend there errors and enormityes by presedent.
Strange, for it can scarce be credible that such prodigious
stuffe as you write of should be licensed to presse. Pardon him!
Mary, God forbid! but first remove him from his Lord and Master
that he do no such further hurt, for the ape wilbe an ape still.
As I said, his fellowe is (\paulo` tectior, nihilo melior\) .
<P I,45>
   If you see my brother Scull, tell him I merveile I heare not
of him. Desire him to have a care of my tenths and half subsidy
att Stanford. Dr. Lindsell shall have Eusebius, I hope, next, or
att second, returne. (\Vale.\)
   Doth the Parleament hold or not?
   Your most affectionate
   R. Mountagu.
   Jan. x=th=. [\1624-5.\] Pettworth.
   To the w=rll=. my very loving frend, Mr. Ihon Cosin, Chaplyn
in house to the Reverend L. B. of Durham, att Durham house,
this.

<Q COS 1625 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,52>
[} [\XXXII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Good Jhon,
My best love remembered. The letter you sent inclosed came from
Paris by Fetherston. It is about Eusebius, whose works they are
now printing there in Greek and Latin, and desire my notes out
of manuscripts and the 5 books against Marcellus, which I have
translated out of Greeke into Latin. I must therfore have my
Eusebius sent back agayne, to fitt it for them, though I have
written first to tender unto them some conditions. Fetherston I
am by them directed unto, to deale [{with{] . It is
<P I,53>
Morell the printer that sendeth by means of one Lucas
Holstenius, with whom I was acquainted here, an Hamburger, a
good scholer, who telleth me he is setting forth another tome to
the (^Bibliotheca Patrum^) , of Fathers not yet extant, and
would fayne have some from us, if we have any. What Austen hath
I can not tell. The man is, I thincke, an honest man.
Howesoever, he may take the fortune I do, in helping
(\rempublicam literariam\) . Send me, I pray therefore, Eusebius
back, and Cassander's works if they may be had. I here say Dr.
Prideux' 9 eggs are rotten, that is, must be called in. My Lord
of Northumberland's chappleyn coming yesterday from London told
me so. And to quitt him I said that Elton's books must be burnt.
(\Molem invidiae\) , howe shall we beare. As sone as you can,
gett directions from Court what to doe. And concerning that of
the Crosse (\quid si\) I did affirme openly what I meane? what
have they to do? is it against comon [\? prayer,\] etc? They
will say it is Popery. So they do allredy. Can they convent me
for it? Or if, (\quo jure\) punish me? But let it go as it is,
only with that addition you speake of out of the Letany, (\Per
Crucem et Passionem libera, etc.\) It is much to purpose.
<P I,54>
   You delt bravely with that nodder with his grave head you
wrote of. I shall tell him a peice of my minde when we meet. For
F. and his curate, knave and foole, lett them go. If you thincke
fitt, leave out the postscript. I am indifferent if you do it or
not. It is no matter whether the D=r=. see my Answere any more.
I have much added out of Mr. Perkins, as you see, their great
Rabbi, what will he say to that. Touching the Epistle, to whom?
(\Cui\) but (\Domino Regi\) , if att all. I say if att all, for
is not the Title an Epistle? Shall I make an other? Beside, in
the conclusion I fly to him agayne. But I will follow my Lord's
and your advise in this: (\cui responsum meum hoc intimes\) . I
send you the rest of my Latin observations. Here is all I will
yett putt forth. Lownes I thincke is true, though hard. The
other you say is a (^Fether^) , let him fly alone. You have the
title of that, have you not? My wife saith such exquisite
thancks nede not. She hath asked me twyce or thrice if you can
not in fayre whether [\weather\] (\excurrere\) hether. It may be
I shall see you before Shrove-tide. (\Vale.\)
   (\Tuus\) , R. M.
   Feb. 7, [\1624-5.\]
   [\ADDRESS TORN OFF.\]

<Q COS 1625 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,54>
[} [\XXXIII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Good Ihon, I received your note unto my brother before your
letter to my self. I would I had stayed longer (though I could
not have ben spared from my necessary businesse of packing up my
bookes for Petworth against Munday, when I send my stuff away),
for so I had escaped a sore cold, which I have gotten by riding
in a very sharpe winde in my face, and an extreame wett
<P I,55>
way by reason of the thawing of the snowe. In good faith, I dare
not venture to come, nor can without manifest and great daunger
of my health more to be impayred, and therefore, good Ihon,
intreate my Lord, of all loves, to excuse me himself, and, if
nede be, in his wisdome to excuse my absence to his Majestie
upon this no fayned excuse. The rather he may do it because I
dedicate it not, and his Majestie tooke notice of it from his
Lordship. By preventing carefully a future sicknes att the
beginning I shall the sooner and better be able to come and be
with you at Convocation, if your niglers, as you call them, do
not deceive you. In the interim, I pray with your pen amend some
of theise the grosser faults in the booke for his Majestie, for
it is ordinary to do soe, and let the printer have the rest.
Upon Munday by my brother's servantt, when he returneth, I shall
happely send more. I am redy to shake, and therfore must leave
writing. Of all loves my Lord must excuse my dishability to come
att present. So trusting to your good mention, I rest
   Your assured
   Ri. Mountagu.
   Feb. vii. [\1624-5.\]
   To my very loving freind Mr. Ihon Cosen, Chaplayn to the L.
B. of Durham, att Durham house be these.

<Q COS 1625 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,64>
[} [\XXXVIII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir,
My love and thancks remembered. Your booke was the first newes I
had certeyne of Spalato, who was, it appeareth, an honester man
then he was taken for, as good as his word unto my self and
others. You see upon desperate terms of separation we stand. No
yelding or moderation any way to be hoped for in point of
opposition from that Church, so long as Puritan Jesuits beare
the sway.
   The Parleament, I heare, is putt of, but (\quousque\) , and
(\quorsum\) I can nott heare. I am loth to come up before the
booke be don, that so (\una` fidelia` duos parietes\) .
Otherwise I had come nowe with Mr. Stokes, who is sent for by
his Lord for a benefice I heare. I wrote not by the carier
because my man was to come, by whom you may returne what you
please: though what you dare not write you shall kepe till I see
you. I have sent an Epistle without much a doe, if you please to
write it over fayre for the King, because my hand is none of the
best. If it be not to purpose, as my Lord would have it, send me
a particular of some heads to insist on. I shall thinck upon
these Articles, peradventure, more seriously, but not till I
have sent Eusebius to Paris.
<P I,65>
   God willing, after Easter I come to Windsore, though if
Austen be returned I se no reason but you may stepp out hether.
Howsoever and whersoever, God Almightie blesse you, and preserve
his Church. I can not att present thinck upon answere to your
question of Prebends, etc. I shall att more leisure and
hereafter.
   Your most assured,
   R: Mountagu.
   Pettworth, March 8, [\1624-5.\]
   To the w=ll=. my most assured loving freind, Mr. Ihon Cosen,
Chaplyn in house to the L. B. of Durham, att Durham house, be
this.

<Q COS 1625 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,69>
[} [\XLIII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir,
The fault was in our waterman who came so late unto you with my
letter; but I excuse him, because he promised to deliver it
himself, as he did, and could not, happely, come any sooner.
Your former relation I had safe, which gave me a greate deale of
contentment, and lett me understand att full the Puritan charity
what it is, such as Arminius found amongst the brethren in the
Netherlands. From their doctrine, discipline, and charity, Good
Lord deliver me and all honest men. Dissentients they indure not
in any petitt opinions, but (\odio Vatiniano execrantur\) .
   I desire to heare what is returned to his Majesty by the
Committee for my booke, if it be possible, for therein is
[^GREEK OMITTED^] . I hope then by your words Dr. White is
firme, though the sonne of a flatt capp told him he had better
have cutt off his hand; who likewise wrote downe to Dr. Prideux
at Oxford that I had vilified him, and undervalued him in my
originall copy, but Dr. White would not suffer it so to passe
with, "one Prideux," and worse terms of disgrace: which it
seemeth hath so incensed the D=r=., this patron of Featly, that
urchin, for his client is the (\graund boutefeu\) in the
business: you knowe his name, S=r=. knight, or rather S=r=.
Knave. I heard of that Jack-an-apes sermon before, by an other.
If he were charged with it he would under his hand happely deny
it, as he hath somewhat else. But possesse your soull in
patience, the spiritt moveth them, their toungs are their owne,
they will speake; and lett them.
   Att Oxford they are all on fire. Here were last weeke at
<P I,70>
Eaton some of the tribe with Mr. Hales, and no talke but
declaming against M. Mountagu. Dr. Prideaux, if he had him
there, would teach him better Divinity. In Bocardo you must
imagine. (\Satis pro imperio.\) Dr. Benefield would teach him
his catechisme. Greate offers! Am I not beholding to theise men,
(\qui me nihil sapere docerent, et magno conatu magnas nugas
agere?\) Nowe [^GREEK OMITTED^] , and if our Gamaliel will nowe
open his mouth and speake out, happily [\haply\] he may do that
good for which God will reward him, and all posterity thanck
him.
   It is also reported that in my booke I should gird at Dr.
Lindsell's acquaintance Mr. Sibbs, because I use the word
(^sib^) , and, howe I knowe not, it is with a capitall letter.
Howe inventive are theise men; though this you knowe was in my
Lord of S. David's mouth, when I was last with you, and I said
then, that would ensue which doth. Graye's Inn men, I heare say,
are offended att it. For their sakes Lindsell may do well to
assure Mr. Sibbs of my innocency in that point. Mr. Delawne, the
man you maried, was with me the other day with his unckle, my
reversioner of Stamford. He told me he would see you (\in
transitu\) . I did not write, because he could not stay.
   For Mr. Mallorye's businesse, thus it is: boording and
breakfest
<P I,71>
will stand him in 16=li=. (\per annum\) , 40=s=. tutorage, which
is all the ordinary expenses I knowe. It may in all stand him in
some 24=li=. (\per annum\) . If he be desirous to have him
thither, I will recommend him to a tutor; or, if he will, I
thinck he may be att Petworth, where is a good scholler, and
painfull and carefull, who teacheth my sonne. By your next let
me understand Mr. Mallorye's resolution, and whether of the two
he will I will take order.
   I entend to go to Pettworth, so sone as Mr. Cruso cometh,
with him. Lett him come (\qua`m citius\) . I would have him
preach their next Sunday, for my Lord expecteth him. I see no
reason but for a day or 2 you may (\excurrere\) to Windsore with
him, telling my Lord of Durham the occasion. Dr. Newell, or Dr.
Lindsell, for so little time may discharge for you. My wife is
there nowe, and will go back with me, but I thinck we shall
returne hither againe after Whitsuntide.
   You knowe I expect missives and pursevants dayly. Dr.
Prideux, you wrote, hath thretned the first thing the Parleament
doth shalbe (for they doubtless are att his beck) to burne my
booke, and whie not me?
   Remember my love to Mr. Mallory, though unknowen, and thanck
him for his kindenes to the cause, indeed rather then any
private man; for nowe it is (\nixus puritanismi\) . They will
putt on, and putt to, and make bold with, as the rule is in
Tacitus, the Prince newe in state. But if those whom it
concerneth more then young men be wanting att such good
occasions, - 
   (\Si Pergama dextris
   Defendi possent, nostris defensa fuissent.\)
   God bless his Church, the King, and those that love them.
[^GREEK OMITTED^] 
   Your assured loving friend
   R. Mountagu.
   Windsore, May 23, [\1625.\]
   If by any means you can, come along with Mr. Cruso.

<Q COS 1625 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,72>
[} [\XLIV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir,
Our moderate men, or furious frantiques are not more out of
patience with me then my wife is with you. She looked for I
knowe not how many thraves of bookes to give her gossips, and do
you put her of with such a trick? If she had not feared that you
would have showed her letter to my Lord of S. David's, (for
Lindsell, she understandeth, is gon a calving into Essex,) you
should have heard of it on both your eares, to tell her that she
thincks not so well of every word and title as you doe, who
saith she will yeld to none in thincking. But by this her choler
is over, and therefore enough of that. I thought my good frends
had talked enough att random till they talked with me to
purpose, it is more then a nyne dayes wonder. I hope att lenght
some of them will sett in hand to answere me. And yet I thincke
not, if they begin to encline to the doctrinall part, and kepe
the morall out. Lett them come of roundly to my doctrine, I will
eate my words of Puritans, etc. for personall quarell have I
none to any one of them. It is well that they begin to talke of
actions on the case, but that, I doubt, will not hold, for
advantage will be on my side. If I have called conformitants,
themselves I meane, Puritans, they have stiled me, as conforme I
am sure, seditious and papist. Let us joyne issue, if they will.
Dr. White and you are in a good course for your Collections.
Happily [\haply\] we may make good use of them otherwise, though
not nowe.
   I have a project I will tell you of one day. But what said
Lindsell to my Lord of Winchester's proposition there? And so he
is to be printed, indeed, whose barbarismes shall never prophane
my pulpett.
   I thanck you hartily and Dr. Pace, with Mr. Otly, for my pore
sister. What or when she shall have ease I can not tell yet, I
feare to sone to use them. I propose upon Munday, [^GREEK
OMITTED^] , to be att Windsore. Write your next thether. I am
sory to heare of Mr. Gibbon's death. Would one I could name had
press'd him [^GREEK OMITTED^] . Mr. Cruso is well, and look'd to
heare from you. Whether he did or not I knowe not, for I write
my letter instantly upon receyte of yours, having an opportune
<P I,73>
and spedy messenger. I mervaile I can not here from my brother
Scull. If you see him, tell him so. (\Vale.\) 
   (\Tuissimus\) ,
   R. Mountague.
   Pettworth, June 10, [\1625.\]
   To the w=rll=. my verie worthie and assured freind, Mr. Iho.
Cosen Chaplyn in house to the L. B. of Durham, att Durham house,
be this.

<Q COS 1625 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,83>
[} [\LI. - FROM RICHARD MOUNTAGUE TO THE BISHOP OF DURHAM\] }]
[^FROM RICHARD MOUNTAGUE TO RICHARD NEILL^]
   Right Reverend, my humble duty premised,
I understand that his Majesty, having ben made acquainted by
your Lordship with that Apologie which I wrote against my
Parleamentary Informers, intendeth to have it printed, and to
that end gave order that Dr. White should looke it over and
informe what, and howe 'twas (^contra`^) , or not (\secundum\) ,
the authorised doctrine of the Church of England. I must
confesse I was desirous enough to have it published, but did not
expect so much when I sent it, but only with desire that his
Majesty
<P I,84>
might understand of it as much as your Lordship should thinck
convenient, and therefore I putt in diverse particulars touching
those men ther specially named, as also the last Articles,
which, the truth is, I had from La[\mbeth\] house by a freind
that I would not willingly discover. My only intent was that if
your Lordship pleased you might give his Majesty information of
them, and so (\transirent\) . But since it is, I understand by
Mr. Cosin, his Majesty's pleasure to have them printed, if it
please your Lordship my desire is to have them left out, as
being not apperteynant to the mayne, unlesse your Lordship shall
thincke otherwise, to whom I wholy and totally referre my self
and the whole. Mr. Cosen wrote unto me that your Lordship was
desirous I should come over and conferr my notes with Dr.
White's, and so both go to the King together. I besech you, my
Lord, consider the season, both in generall, of the yeere, and
this time so unfitt to travell in, I am sure with us, out of
this country, which your Lordship knoweth very well, especially
for my body, very crasie, and but untoward to travell in winter.
I protest before God, my good Lord, I would not willingly nowe
travell for a good preferment, being like enough to gett that
which I shall not in hast gett of agayne. These 5 last winters
by such journyes, I gott those coulds that hung by me, some of
them, 4 months. Good my Lord, therfore, I besech you spare me
and excuse me, that I may in helth do the Church and you service
long. I suppose also his Majesty will have no greate leisure as
yett at London to attend this petty businesse, nor do I conceive
any such cause of hastning it to the presse. It is not much, and
will soone be dispatched whensoever. Beside, I would gladly see
what Dr. White sayth, and advise upon his notes, being att my
owne notes and amongst my owne books, which I can not so well do
being from them. My humble desire, therefore, is, that your
Lordship would be pleased to excuse my attendance, and to will
Mr. Cosen to send me the copy, with his observations, which may
be don by our carier, as he knoweth, as safe as by any messenger
of purpose. So my humble duty allway remembred, with hearty and
daily prayer for your Lordship, the only true and reall frend
the Church hath of your ranck, I take my leave, and rest,
   Att your Lordship's service,
   Ri. Mountagu.
   Pettworth, S. Stephen's day, [\1625.\]
   To the right Reverend father in God, my very good Lord, the
Lord Bishopp of Duresme, these.

<Q COS 1626 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,85>
[} [\LII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir,
Since my returne I have ben sorely trobled with the stone, and
am not free, though I have fewer by 4 greate ones then I had
when I was with you. I pray lett me knowe, if you can, when the
choyce for clerks will be in London diocese, and whether you
thincke it not fitt that I write unto my Lord of London to putt
him in mind of his promise to me, and lett him understand what
my Lord Marshall wrote unto me concerning his redines and
willingnesse in my business; and that my Lord Duke will give him
thanks because I told him of his promise unto me. If you will I
will lett him knowe of this the next returne, and inclose my
letter to you.
   I am wholy busied in setting downe (you knowe for whom I told
you) ours and the Calvinists' doctrine of Predestination. I can
not write long, for my paine is not gon. God kepe you and us
all.
   Your assured
   R. M.
   Jan. 19, [\1625-6.\]
   To the right w=ll=. my most assured frend, Mr. Ihon Cosen,
att Durham house, this.

<Q COS 1626 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,87>
[} [\LV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir, I dare not yet adventure to come up, my purging and
stone payne hath made me feeble. I am not able long to walke up
and downe, ther lyeth yet in my loyns such a payne, beside, att
present I have no meanes to come, the sickness growing very
dangerous in Windsore, insomuch as that we have dismissed
sermons and locked up our gates. I was fayne to send yesterday
<P I,88>
my people to Pettworth, only my self and my wife with a maid
remaining behind; and come by water, which is the only way, I
dare not, least I gett that which I can not cleare of. Beside,
were I with you, I would not come att the Parleament, for it is
to no purpose ther, and best to give me over to the Lords, which
is the utmost they can doe. I hope to have fayre audience there,
being generous and understanding men. Their course intended and
accusations to be presented, att least most of them, I knewe
longe since. Three weeks agoe, one of the Committee wrote unto
me "that their chiefest labours were to prove that I sett
sedition betwixt the King and his people, and betwixt subject
and subject, that I indeavoured reconciliation betwixt us and
the Church of Rome, and that I am reconciled to the Church of
Rome, that I have abused the late King, used great profanenes
<P I,89>
in writing, slighted and disgraced the best lights in the
Reformed Church," and such like. All which, by most necessary
conclusions and inferences, and some of them in expresse termes,
will fall upon me out of my owne books. As for my pardon, it
will not availe me, as the course is taken. For they meane to
goe to the busines by an Act of Parliament which will avoid the
pardon; "especially seing now the Duke's Grace hath by his
freinds disavowed you and your books and doctrine in open
Parlement on Friday last." (This was written March 27.) "And the
pardon extendeth but to offences particularly named against the
King, and this is supposed to be against Church and Common-
welth. For the privilege (of Convocation) they intend not to
infring it, but when all things be redy, you shall have notice,
and you may come if you will. But come or come not, they will
procede at the last to condemning of your books." Thus much out
of my frend's letter, whom I must conceale, and therefore burne
this letter, or kepe it close; by which you see their
resolution, and that it is to no purpose to say any thing for my
self or cause unto them. My only desire to be with you, if
possibly I could, is to knowe what you must not or dare not
write, for I misbode some greate matter. But I hope you will
gett it downe to me nowe. I sent my man on purpose. You may
trust him with a letter and me to burne it afterward. I confesse
I mervale the Parliament holdeth so longe, and that they thus
daudle out the King with doing nothing.
   Att the very beginning of the next weeke I purpose, God
willing to be with you. For I suppose before, the L[\ords\] will
take no greate notice, and I knowe most, alway, that is
objected. But, above all, I never yet repented to referre the
ordering and directing of all businesse to God, who knoweth more
and seeth farther then we can.
   I have not yet heard or seen any of their messengers. If he
come, I meane to give him that answere you advise, and I was
resolved; to which you see my frend also did direct me, who
would fayne persuade me they procede without all passion in this
busines. The old woman that kept my Lord of Gloucester's house
is dead of the plague, but not in his house nor nere it, nor
hath she been there a good time. There are twenty persons in our
pest house, beside 6 or 7 houses infected. God help us
<P I,90>
and rid us out of our trobles. I besech you write your minde,
and longe, and if it be very expedient that I come up, come
life, come death, I will be with you. Referring all unto God who
[\...\] (\Vale.\)
   Your assured
   R. M.
   Aprill 20, [\1626.\]
   To the w=ll=. my most assured and worthie freind. Mr. Jhon
Cosen, Chapla [\...\] the Lo. B=p=. of Durha~, this at Durha~
hou [\...\]

<Q COS 1626 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,92>
[} [\LVIII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Good Ihon,
I hartely thancke you for your letters, though what should I
say? His Majesty will defend, and they will oppugne. Let them,
so he do: or let him leave them and me to our pens. I can not
come if I would. This day I ended the fift fitt of a tertian
ague, which maketh me so short. Remember my love to Mr. Selden,
and tell him were I in case I would have written
<P I,93>
to him. He did ingenuously and like himself, but disire him to
putt that confidence in me that I willingly would make him
arbitrator, and as they have informed agaynst me by libell, so
desire him to gett me a copy thereof, that I may answere by
libell. Though if it be as you write, that I am by them
[{accused{] of sedition, it is capitall, and I must not beare
it. For the rest, (\rideo\) .
   I understood before of Austen's good case. After his danger
it was the first question I asked Sir Ihon Leeds at his returne
to Pettworth. God be blessed for his helth. Remember my love to
him, and tell him God hath not don this for nothing, but to have
him putt to his hand, and stand with us in the gap against
thoise domesticke enimyes the Puritan faction, in my opinion as
daungerous to Church and Monarchie as the nowe banished. But
God's will be don. I repent me not to have offended them, and
stirred the hornetts' neast. I hope my reward wilbe elsewhere
for it. (\Vale\) , for I can not stand long.
   Your assured
   R. Mountagu.
   Pettworth, Whitmonday, [\1626.\]
   To the w=rll=. my assured freind, Mr. Ihon Cosin, Chapleyne
in house to the Reverend Father in God, the L: Bishop of Durham,
att Durham house, be these.

<Q COS 1626 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,101>
[} [\LXIV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir,
This present Saturday, August 26, I came to London to do my duty
to my Lord Duke, because I missed him att Windsore, where I mett
our worthie true frind, who did me the honor to dyne with me att
a fish diner upon Fryday. He and I had much talke (\pro et
citra`\) of occurrences. He shewed me a letter from your self,
but no word of one thing was there. Wott you what? (\Aiunt te
conjectum in vincula, sed nuptiarum.\) The suborner was the
author and I told it our frind. I was feyne to break promise
with our frind. I told him I would come upon Sunday morning to
his house, and go with him to my Lord Duke, but it was my good
happ to dine with his Grace and my Lady Denbighs the day before,
that is on Saturday, where I mett, and had much good talke with,
that worshipfull the Lady Faulkland. I also became acquainted
with my Lord Duke's mother, the Duchesse of Buckingham. I hope
well. Were I with you I would tell you what discourse we had.
(\Litteris autem loquitur.\) I had good spech with his Grace,
and noble assurance both for him self and his Majesty, which I
trust wilbe to my content and yours. I stad so longe there that
my Lord of Worcester, who that day came out of Wiltshire, was
gon to Bromly before I could gett free, and my Lord of St.
David's, (\quondam\) , was gon to Croydon, (\cur ego nescio\) ,
unlesse about his newe bishopricke. The election is returned and
royall assent passed, so that nowe he is (\Electus Bathon\) .
The rest sleepe, and shall yet a while, (\quousque\) things be
fitt. Dr. White shall have Carlile, but (\de Exonia`
ampliandum\) . Dr. Mawe is of, Dr. Hall on. Bishop Murray ernest
by the
<P I,102>
King's Atturny. [^LATIN AND GREEK OMITTED^]
   The French are all gon, but no (\Evangelia\) for my Lord or
you. There be new French come to Durham house. Our worthie frend
did what he could to avert them, but the King could not tell
howe to dispose them, and so there they must be, but not long,
it is promised. The Queen hath thre preists, Father Phillipps, I
thinck, her Confessor, a Scottishman, Father Godfry, and Mr.
Potter, all honest moderate men as they say. I have much to say,
but (\cora`m\) . The French ladyes are all gon, I thincke. There
be of her Majesty's bedchamber the Duchesse of Buckinghame and
the Lady Savage; Roman Catholicks. The rest Protestants. My Lord
Percy is M=r=. of her horse, the Lord Montgomery is Lord
Chamberlayne. The allyance you spake of is made. I hope (\bono
publico, et nostro privato\) . My Lord's Grace is wonderous
well, God be thancked.
   The Commons, (\nescio quomodo, quibus auxiliis\) , do deny to
lend money. The shipps are going out. Captyne Porter goeth. Our
worthie frind tells me he will stay att Portsmuth before he goe,
and will take Pettworth in his way.
   There is a booke come out against me since you went, by one
Prinne, a lawer. (\Nullus vidi adhuc.\) So little do they care
for authority. Dr. Featly did insinuate to my Lady Denbigh
disavowing Puritanisme, and all he had don against the Appeale.
I thincke I have cast a bone in his way. I came but lately from
Pettworth, therfore you must not look for much newes from me. I
am booted redy to ride, therfore I can not enlarge.
   Remember my service to his Lordship. My commendations to Dr.
L. who envieth your felicity, therefore (\ambit uxorem\) . So
Mr. Subcantor told me.
<P I,103>
   (\Vale.\) My sone Stokes remembers his service to you both. I
am glad you are become an honest man.
   (\Tuissimus\) ,
   R. M.
   August 26, [\1626.\]
   Westminster.
   To the w=ll=. my worthy frend Ihon Cosen, Archdeacon of
Yorke, att Durham, be this. Leave this att Durham house, to be
delivered to Mr. Holmses to be sent as directed.

<Q COS 1626 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,104>
[} [\LXVI. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir, (\Salutem in Christo\) . I have no much newes, nor
occasion to write, but only that the bearer being att Pettworth
so opportunely, and to take Durham, at least Mr. Blacston's, in
his way, I would not lett you go (\insalutatum\) . I spake with
my Lord Duke's Grace since I wrote my letter last unto you,
which I hope you had from Durham house. (\Idem semper\) , and so
am I. All that I sayd was, I refer'd my self wholy to his Grace.
You like not this modestie, but why not. If I should erre in
settling upon any thing, I might thanke my self. Now I putt it
to God, and do what is convenient. All wilbe for the best.
   I can not heare of my Lord of Bath and Wells, where he is.
The Bishopricks are not yet bestowed nor resolved that I can
heare of.
   Privy seales go abroade and deepe to some brethren. I hope
they shall pay. There be 1000 men of those that went the last
voyage billetted in Sussex; as many, they say, in Kent.
   Dr. Good hath left the Archbishop's service and Mr. Jeffryes
of Pembroke hall is in his place.
   Make as much hast as you can I pray. It is time for you, I
hope, to come and see your unckle. If you knowe not the meaning
of this proverbe, enquire. Lindsell, I understand, invieth our
felicity, and would also turne honest man. I will not say
[^GREEK OMITTED^] , but it is almost to late. Let him make hast,
and over take you and me. Commend me to him, and to your Fan,
though unknowen. If you bring her not up, I hope you will make
hast downe. My service to my Lord must not be forgotten. (\Vale,
et precibus nos juva. Nos te.\)
   Your assured, you know who, by the hand.
   Sept=r=. xi. [\1626.\]
   [\ADDRESS TORN OFF.\]

<Q COS 1627 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,105>
[} [\LXVIII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD
MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Good Iohn,
Att my returne home I found a letter and 4 or 5 shetts of paper
sent unto me from one Thomas Procter, a man unknowen (\de nomine
et facie\) . It was a tract against the Bishop of Chichester,
for divers errors of his in point of Predestination. The first
was, that though we be justified frely, yet not without respect
to faith; (\et sic de electione\) , out of Rom: iii. 24, 26: the
2, that though it be with respect to faith, it is farr from
Pelag[\ianism\] , etc. and so of the rest, a modest but quick
stile. I guessed it some honest ingenus layman's, and such he
was that delivered the papers to the waterman, and will require
them. I had but little time to read them over, but did twice,
and sent him some observations. I lett him understand of my
going to Pettworth, but if [{it{] pleas'd him to repayre to you
and Dr. Lindsell, that you would advice him for the best. I sent
to him to lett me understand his state and condition more fully.
He specifieth twice that he hath written of this argument, which
I never sawe. Did you? If you have any newes for us, lett us
have it, and what you thinke of things, how they are like to
goe.
<P I,106>
(\Uttcunque\) , I will dispatch my answere to the Bishop, and so
lett it rest for a good time, if God send it. Remember me most
kindly to Mr. Porter. I am now, upon better thincking of it, of
your mind, if I might have Exeter, but not else. If the king be
resolved, methincks it were best to destop them: but [^GREEK
OMITTED^] . Upon Thursday, except any thing hinder, I am for
Pettworth. I could wish our Deane were a Bishop, and some of
you, or Dr. Lins[\ell\] , our Deane. (\Optima speranda,
quaecunque evenerint ferenda.\) I am sory you are for the north
this summer. I shall thincke long till you returne.
   Your loving frend,
   R. M.
   Jan. 19, [\1626-7.\]
   To the w=ll=. my worthy frend, Mr. Ihon Cosen, att Durham
house, this.

<Q COS 1628 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,138>
[} [\LXXV. - FROM ARCHDEACON COSIN TO BISHOP LAUD.\] }] [^FROM
JOHN COSIN^]
Right Reverend and my Right Honorable good Lord, my dutie in
most humble wise remembered.
   The licentious libells lately printed without licence, and
vented out into all parts against me, have made me the subject
of every man's censure; and by them that either doe not know, or
doe not affect me, I am, I know not how heavily and how hardly
burdened. But being long since inured to such kinds of injurie
and slander, I am the better fitted to beare it now; and knowing
how forward the iniquitie of this age is to take advantage of
any, though never so just, opposition, I have resolv'd to make
no other answere then (\Dixi, custodiam\) , and to take no other
revenge upon such intemperate malice then contempt and silence
doth upon a scolding and unbridled tongue. Howsoever, doe what I
can, I shalbe censur'd still; if I hold my peace for peace sake,
there are enough that will take it as a most certaine argument
that I lack what to say in mine owne defence; and if I doe but
open my mouth, to say my Creed for truth's sake, there are
enough to make angry informations against me that I cannot be
quiet. But in the judgment of grave and sober men, I trust my
credit shalbe neither one way nor other impayred, and if I may
find patronage and approbation (^above^) , it shall not much
move me what they doe or say (^beneath^) . For which purpose I
most humbly beseech his
<P I,139>
Sacred Majestie, the only Supreme Govenour [\...\] all to
continue his gracious protection over me; and your Lordship's
goodnes to be a meanes for the same. It is his gracious defence
against the overgrowing faction, more then any private revenge,
that I seek, against these two barking libellers, whose
chastisement I am bound to leave to their governement and
autoritie that they have so notoriously and impudently also
abused.
   The accusations which they bring against me about altering of
the Common Prayer Book, your Lordship can best tell how peevish
and vayne they be; specially if you have called for that booke
from the King's Printer, which they say I have so magisterially
noted. Some marginall directions indeed I wrote at the instant
request of Bill and Norton, to be a help to them in the amending
of such faults and omissions in their severall volumes, for
which they had bin a little before schooled by your Lordship,
upon warrant and command from his Majestie. Notes for other
alterations I made not, unlesse it were here and there for the
beautifying of the book with sundry characters and fairer
letters then before, or for the printing of the (\Pater noster\)
at large. There were divers false and misnamed lessons noted,
[\IN MARGINE:\] [^79 WORDS FROM As TO Christ.^] As the 1 Lesson
at Evensong upon the day of Circumcision, and the 1 Lesson at
Mattins upon the day of Epiphanie: the first of these ending
where it should begin; and the 2=d= most improperly set for a
(^proper lesson^) , being the xl, whereas it should be the lx,
of Esay, by which transposition of one letter the people in many
churches are told of S. John Baptist, when they shold heare of
the Gentils coming to Christ. which in the great book they have
not yet amended, and in the Calendar, where they begin to reckon
the Kalends of, or before, every month, they have let the name
of the month stand still in the same character and in the same
order with the Saints dayes, as if Februarie and Hilarie were
sainted both alike.
   For the adding of the Ordination Booke, (as I often
acquainted your Lordship and my Lord of Winton) it was grounded
upon the Statute, An Act of Parliament made 8=o= Elizab. cap. I.
<P I,140>
which revives the Statute of King Edward the 6th, wherby the
Book of Ordination was to be, and was accordingly annexed, added
and printed to and with the Book of Common Prayer, as also to
have the same force, vigor, and autoritie &c. I have since
look'd further into the warrant of this addition, and I find
that in the last Canons and Constitutions, where by the 36 Canon
we are all tyed to subscribe unto (^three Articles^) , the
second of them runs in these termes, viz. (^That the Booke of
Common Prayer, and of Ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
conteineth in IT nothing contrary, &c., and that IT may
lawfully, &c.^) : words which manifestly shew that our Church
reckons them both to be (^but one and the same Booke^) ; and
enough, I trow, to quit me from any presumption in this behalfe,
wherewith, they say, I am so generally charged. Besides, all
this hath bin done in my absence from London. I was not there
either to force or to oversee the presse, neither did I commend
or enjoyne any thing, but intimate and direct only (as the
printer requested) what shold be done, leaving him to take
warrant either from his former copies or from the Acts of
Parliament, or from them that were now in autoritie and place
for that purpose.
   These things I make bold to call unto your Lordship's
remembrance, that, if need be, your honorable favour [\...\]
towards me, together with your religious care of all
ecclesiasticall affayres, may make use herof, for the satisfying
of many great persons, who for want of knowing these things may
peradventure take some exception also at that which is done.
   I am now resident upon my Parsonage of Brancepeth,
<P I,141>
a remote and quiet place, which I cannot name without a most
lowly and thankfull remembrance aswell of my Lord Duke's noble
grace as of your Lordship's honorable disposition towards me, by
whose goodnes I enjoy it: and for whose length and peace of
dayes I cease not here to pray even every day in God's
sanctuary, as my duty is. But ceasing to withold your Lordship
any longer from intending the multitude of those great affayres
wherein you are (happily I doubt not) imployed, I humbly take my
leave and rest.
   Your Honor's most bounden and true humble servant,
   Jo. Cosin.
   Brancepeth, June, 1628.
   To the R=t=. R=d=. Father in God, my very honorable good
Lord, y=e=. L=d=. B=p=. of Bath and Wells, one of y=e=. L=ds=.
of his Ma=ties=. most hon=ble=. Privie Councell, These.

<Q COS 1628 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,141>
[} [\LXXVI. - FROM RICHARD MOUNTAGU TO ARCHDEACON COSIN.\] }] 
[^FROM RICHARD MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir,
Your letter came too late for me to speake with any Parleament
men concerning your businesse. The Session was concluded and
they risen, but had it come sooner, do you thincke me gratious
there, who should have ben left out of the pardon, if there had
ben any, and their petition might have prevayled. I knowe no man
I can build upon in that Assembly, but nor you nor I need
greatly feare them, for what have we don? They cannot convent
you, being a member of the Convocation. By the Statute of Hen.
6. viii=o= [\anno, cap:\] the first, the Convocation hath all
the privileges of either or both houses, which they acknowledge
<P I,142>
in my case, who yet (\post tot et tantos strepitus\) here
nothing of them, and now I am told his Majestie hath gratiously
graunted a pardon for us all that are such (\cordolia\) to them.
I could in a sort have wished you had ben sent for, for then we
should have enjoyed your company, as you promised me in Easter
terme, and we should have schooled you for the 180 tapers upon
Candlemas night. We must be wary and wise, you and I especially,
and (\Dum furor in cursu est, currenti cede furori\) . It is
well resolved not to rejoyne to those bandoggs, but [^GREEK
OMITTED^] and expect better dayes, at least not to scold with
scolds.
[^LATIN VERSE OMITTED^]
   Newes I can send you none but what you knowe, and Dr. Linsell
can tell you, concerning my self and others. Only remember me to
your wife, though unknowen, and if I were a Bishop I should send
a Bishop's blessing, as you have the prayers of your
   Pore true loveing frind,
   Ri. Mountagu.
   London, July vii. [\1628.\]
   To the right w=ll=. my very worthy freind, Mr. Ihon Cosin,
Archdeacon of York, att Durham.

<Q COS 1628 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,144>
[} [\LXXVIII. - FROM ARCHDEACON COSIN TO BISHOP LAUD.\] }]
   Right Reverend and my verie honorable good Lord.
Since the copie of Mr. Smart's Sermon was sent unto your
Lordship, he hath, beyond all example or expectation, preferred
foure Indictments against us, at these last Assizes here in
Durham: one, that we place our Communion-Table the wrong way;
another, that we stand up and sing the Creed after the Gospell;
a third, that we use waxe lights and tapers; and a fourth, that
Mr. Burgoyne hath set up an altar in his church at Warmouth. All
which were by him suppos'd and urg'd to be superstitious or
unlawfull ceremonies, and contrary to the Act of Uniformitie,
&c. A great noise here was about it, and tongues began to walk
at large, but they had done o' the suddaine; for the Grand Jurie
found nothing, and the Judge, Sir James
<P I,145>
Whitlock, with whom they consulted, (as the use is) rejected the
Indictments in open Court, letting the country know that he knew
no law whereupon they should be grounded, and adding that the
man deserved no small punishment who, in this unwonted sort, had
gone about to disgrace the Church, and to dishonour the
solemnitie of God's service there, where himself had been both
an eare and an eye witnesse that all thinges were done in
decencie and in order; urging, further, the commendation and
defence of those particulars against which he tooke exception
whose spleene was too big for his brayne. But since this devise
would take no effect, (unlesse it were shame to him that
invented it) we are threatened with further complaints, and he
sticks not to professe it openly that he will fetch us all into
higher Courts than these: neither will the furie of so hot a
spirit be stayed till he hath set all on fire, unlesse he be
cool'd by autoritie.
   With this passage I thought it my dutie to acquaint your
Lordship, and so to take my leave, after I have told you that
Dr. Lindsell is lighter by 21 stones than he was before he took
his journey from London, having been troubled here with that
disease these three weeks, but now growing to a faire recoverie
of his health; for which, next under God, the physitian sayes he
is beholden to his long travell, which by stirring of his bodie
hath beene a meanes to remove and send away those tormentours
that otherwise might have handled him with greater crueltie, if
not ston'd him to death. God keep him in health, and God reward
your Lordship for rewarding his learning and goodnes with a
dignitie of our Church. I pray for your Lordship's quiet and
long life, ever being
   Your most humble and true servant,
   Jo. Cosin.
   Branspeth, Aug. 19, 1628.
   To y=e=. R=t=. R=d=. Father in God, my very hon=ble=. good
Lord, y=e=. Lord Bishop of London, one of y=e=. L=ds=. of his
Ma=ties=. most hon=ble=. privie Councell, These.

<Q COS 1628 RMOUNTAGU>
<A RICHARD MOUNTAGUE>
<G M>
<P I,152>
[} [\LXXXV. - FROM RICHARD MOUNTAGU, BISHOP OF CHICHESTER, TO
ARCHDEACON COSIN.\] }] [^FROM RICHARD MOUNTAGUE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Honest Mr. Archdeacon,
I would I could give you the blessing I desire, either I would
come to you, or you should be with me; for (\praefiscine` dico,
Non inveni similem; omnes sua quaerunt\) : and it was written
unto me lately, by my Lord of Cant[\erbury\] that my greate
friends, so he phrased it, would take no blowes for me. In good
time, and yet it may be their owne heads may smart. You in the
north, I in the south, are the object of toungs and penns, and I
must
<P I,153>
be unbishop't a geyne. But thretned men, they say, live long. So
may wee, [^GREEK OMITTED^] . For my own part, (\audio, rideo\) .
Yet
<P I,154>
our Master is mindfull of us, for Mr. Atturney told me himself
the King had given him expresse charges to draw a pardon for you
and me. I have it not, for some interloper hath clos'd it with
Dr. Sibthorpe, Manwaring, [{and{] Jackson. Yet this last refused
it. So would I, but that (\gratiae\) are not to be rejected.
Were you here I would speake my minde freely. I dare not write.
But I have none like yourself. Beshrewe you for going to the
north, and send you some occasion, though against your will, to
draw you to the south. That good lady I have not seene lately.
She was then nere childbirth when that Ravailliac gave the
dismall blowe, and since Bartholomew tide I have not been in
London, being hindered with my new incumbrances, and since with
a durty journey not fitting a crasy body. Our good friend Mr.
Porter is not returned. God Almighty send him back [^GREEK
OMITTED^] . Dr. Collins by my Lady Denbigh's importunity hath
his patent confirmed for Windsore, and is in expectation for the
next. He had it before the Duke's death. Our Deane would fayne
be any Bishop. Nowe removes wilbe, I would we had you there. My
Lord of London can do what he will, can you not prevaile with
him? I am not feissable. Happly with others I could putt on. My
desire is to be with you some where. If you can let us see you
this spring. (\Vale, vive.\)
   (\Tuissimus\) ,
   Ri. Cicest.
   Nov. 23, [\1628.\]
   My wife remembers her love, and dreames of you sometimes.
   To the w=ll=. my most worthy and loving freind Mr. Ihon
Cosen, Prebend of Durham and Archdeacon of Yorke, att Branspeth
by Durham, this.
   Leave this at Mr. Blakiston's shoppe, at the three Pigeons in
St. Paul's Churchyard.

<Q COS 1629 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,158>
[} [\LXXXVIII. - LETTER FROM ARCHDEACON COSIN (PROBABLY TO
BISHOP LAUD).\] }] 
   Right reverend and my very honorable good lord.
I trust your Lordship will pardon my boldnes, and give way to my
necessitie, if I still adventure to trouble you with matters
<P I,159>
that concerne my safetie. Mr. Smart is questioned at Yorke for
depraving the solemnitie of Divine Service, and, to be even with
some of us, (wherof I must alwaies look to be one) he will not
suffer all to goe unquestioned here at Durham: where he hath
taken advantage of the time, the Bishop's absence, with other
concurrent helpes, and preferred severall Indictments against
Mr. Burgoyne and myselfe at these last assizes, before Judge
Yelverton, the same which Judge Whitlock, the yeere before, had
rejected and cast out of the Court, as knowing no law wheron
they shold be grounded, and allowing what we did with much
approbation in the Church, charging the Jury to admit of no such
presentments, but if any doubts were about the manner of
celebrating any Church service, to referre the parties that
doubted to the Bishop, according to the order in that behalf
provided by the Preface to our book of Common Prayer. But it
shold seeme the law is falne out to be otherwise this yeere then
it was the last, and it is false doctrine to say now as Judge
Whitlock did: for we are taught, and the Jury stood by, That as
some men have bin punished and deprived for refusing to use some
ceremonies commanded in the Church by law, so other some are as
punishable, if they shall dare to use any other rite, ceremonie,
ornament, or order whatsoever, which is not expressly appointed
in the book of Common Prayer, and if any such were indicted that
they should then be punished at the Assizes. Wherupon, we are
like (they say) to be indicted the next time for our organs and
our cornets, together with the candlesticks and tapers upon the
Communion Table, there being no such things expressed in the
book. But these Indictments which Mr. Smart hath now preferred
against us, how frivolous and how malicious they proved even in
Judge Yelverton's owne judgment, what conference he had with us,
about our better agreement and unitie hereafter, what his
apprehension was both of Mr. Smart's spirit and ours, what his
reprehension was of such smart and fierce and unchristian
courses, (these were his words) and last of all what my temper,
actions and behaviour have bin all this while, I humbly beseech
your Lordship that this bearer, Mr. Duncon, and Mr. Deane of
Lichfield, at his returne, may at your Lordship's leisure relate
unto you. In the meane while the Judge hath stay'd the
Indictments from any further publick view or prosecution, untill
he hath consulted with your Lordship, my Lords of Durham and
Winchester, for reasons best knowne to himself. When he speaks
with your Lordship I trust he will give a better testimonie of
me then my adversaries are willing to have him, and your
Lordship may assure both your self and him, that I am not so
carefull to mainteyne what I doe, as to doe nothing but what
<P I,160>
I may justly mainteine. I beseech your Lordship to continue your
goodnes toward me, without which mine enemies are too strong and
too mightie for me. God Almightie encrease your strength and
honor with long life. I take my leave and ever remaine,
   Your Lordship's to be commanded and most devoted servant,
   John Cosin.
   Branspeth, July 26, 1629.

<Q COS 1629 RBLAKISTON>
<A ROBERT BLAKISTON>
<G M>
<P I,160>
[} [\LXXXIX. - FROM ROBERT BLAKISTON TO ARCHDEACON COSIN.\] }]
   Nephew Coosins,
I am animated by the testimony of my kind neighbour Mr. Martin
of your favourable loving speches lately spoken on my behalfe,
to certifye, and, I hope, satisfye you of some aspertions, and
thereby some unkindnesses worse taken then intended by either my
brother Marmaduke or me, if they might peceably and without
offence be examined according to the true meaning of either
partye. But first give me leave to satisfye you concerning that
sinfull and therfore damnable calumniation reported of me and my
then maide. I protest, as in the presence of God, I never had
carnall knowledge of hir or any other woman dead or living, my
two wives, now with God, only excepted. For the other hard
esteeme of me in difference between Mr. Braidley his Curate and
me, I must neads saie I could and yet can prove sufficiently, if
it were to re-examined by your selfe with free libertye and
without offence taken against the witnesses, who will saie that
on the 9=th= of May 1628, he did revile me approbriously,
calling me base scurvye rascall, and strooke at me very eagerly,
when I did much forbeare him, partly for that I thought he was
not himselfe through his distemperature, not fitting a man of
his function, but especially for my brother his sake, thinking
he would have given him an open rebuke for his open miscarriage
against a naturall brother, for he denied before
<P I,161>
him with execrable imprecations that he did not misdemeane
himselfe either by word or deed as I have related, which I
conceived was then too much beleeved, and which, if I cannot
sufficiently disprove as aforesaid, I will submitt my selfe to
your hardest censure. For the other unkindnesses, I will, for my
part, burye all in utter oblivion, as it becometh me in
Christianitye, preparinge my selfe to receive the assured seales
of my redemption and salvation at this appointed holy feast,
freely forgiving and desiring forgiveness of all the world. And
namely concerning my lettere to my brother, your father in lawe,
I doe confesse I writt more earnestly and passionately then I
should, and for that and any other thinge wherin I have given
just cause of offence, I am very sorrye, and doe hartely desire
you to be a meanes that we maie be conjoyned in that brotherly
affection that we ought to be and formerly have bene. And so, my
love remembred to you and my neece, I take leave and rest,
   Your very loving uncle,
   Robt. Blakiston.
   Durham, 22nd March, 1629.
   To my very lovinge nephew, Mr. John Coosins, one of the
Prebends of the Cathedrall Churche att Durham, and Pastor of the
Churche of Brandspithe, give these.

<Q COS 1631 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,204>
[} [\XCIII. - FROM DR. COSIN TO THE BISHOP OF LONDON.\] }] [^TO
GILBERT SHELDON^]
   Right reverend and my very honorable good Lord,
I am sorry that these letters cannot speak that which I know
your Lordship is desirous to heare, concerning our peace with my
Lord of Durham; whose displeasure (when last I took leave of
your Lordship at London) I thought had bin fully at an end; for
so he assured me at my departure from him. But here I find it is
otherwise, and am like to feele it too, unles the innocencie of
my cause and the benefit of the law may help me, or otherwise it
shall please your lordship of your goodnes to interpose.
   I will crave but a little leave, and tell your lordship
briefly how it hath fared with us since my Lord's last comming
to Durham; who, within a few dayes after, was pleased to hold
his Visitacion, (which he had begun the last yeere among us) and
thereat, openly before us all, to declare his great displeasure
conceyved against Dr. Lindsell and my selfe, for the speech
which we had with your Lordship at Fulham, and which it liked
his Lordship to call (^accusations and articles preferred
against him^) . It further pleased him to tell in particular
what they were, and to answer them, as I suppose he had done
before to your Lordship, and afterwards caused the letter which
your Lordship sent copied out unto him to be publikely read by
the Registrar, calling it a libell, and a saucie letter, after
much time had bin otherwise spent about the examination of it.
This was done the first day.
   But now more lately, after divers meetings, when I thought
all anger had bin past, his Lordship was pleased to come and
prosecute his Visitation in the Chapter house, and there
presently to tell us that now he intended to proceed against
them that had misbehaved themselves towards him, and first of
all to begin with me, whom first he meant to be rid of, and to
rid me out of the Church. For which purpose he had drawne
certeine articles of misdemeanour against me (of which I trow
the pretended
<P I,205>
articles exhibited against him to your Lordship and the letter
are the greatest) which he willed his Registrar to enact and
record, with an admonition to appeare 14 dayes after. Wherupon I
perceive his Lordship's displeasure lyeth hard upon me, although
I have laboured many waies to observe him, and no way to give
him any just cause of offence, not knowing wherin it is I shold
so displease him, unlesse it were in being with Dr. Lindsell at
Fulham, when your Lordship was acquainted with the alteration of
our Church service, and in deferring my voyce to the
confirmation of Mr. Parsons' patent, which shold not have bin
deferred neither longer then till his Lordship's comming hither
into the country, for that some of us were desirous first to
speak with his Lordship about it.
   I dare trouble your Lordship's many occasions and patience no
further, but humbly craving the continuance of your honorable
favour and good opinion towards me, I submit all my actions to
your Lordship's censure, which (without sute of law) I wish
might put an end to these matters, that were at first so
private. But if, in the mean while, it shall please my Lord of
Durham still to proceed unto my danger and prejudice, I trust it
shall not offend your Lordship if, by the advise of councell, I
shall legally refuse and decline his Lordship's intended
censure, having already so openly declared himself against me,
and threatned to turne me out of the Church, wherin I desire to
serve God with diligence, and daily to pray for your Lordship's
health and honour long to continue. I rest ever at your
Lordship's command and service,
   Jo. Cosin.
   Branspeth, Sept. 24, 1631.
   To the R=t=. R=d=. Father in God, my very hon=ble= good
Lord, the L=d=. Bishop of London, one of y=e= L=d=.='s= of his
Ma=tie's=. most Hon=ble=. Privy Councell, these.

<Q COS 1631 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,205>
[} [\XCIV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM JOHN COSIN
TO GILBERT SHELDON^]
   Right Reverend and my verie Honorable good Lord,
Since the late letters wherby I was bold in my instant
necessitie to implore your Lordship's favour, wee have made 3
dayes appearance before my Lord of Durham, and yesterday was the
last: when without any such severe proceedings by Articles or
otherwise, as his Lordship had before resolved, he was pleased
to end this his Visitation; and, after some orders made for the
<P I,206>
Church, and some proposed (though not yet enacted) to bring
disgrace upon us, together with an open reproofe, and a large
declaration of our supposed malice against Mr. Smart first, and
then against Mr. Deane of Durham, and last of all against his
Lordship, to dismiss us from further attendance. All which time
wee have borne his Lordship's pleasure with silence and
patience, more then was expected. And still Mr. Deane of
Lichfeld and my selfe are humble suitors to your Honour that you
wold be pleased at his Lordship's comming to London to move him
effectually (as wee have often done (\frustra`\) ) for the
laying downe of this his Lordship's great and undeserved
displeasure conceyved against us for the discourse wee had with
your Lordship concerning him, and for the letter: and that wee
may have publick peace and common favour with him at least, if
his more reserved affections be cast upon some others, that
never honor'd him so truly as wee have done, and that upon
speciall regard and reverence therein had to your Lordship's
owne contentment. The world takes notice here of my Lord's high
discontent against us, being so often and so publikely
expressed, that advantage is most likely to be made of it, both
by Mr. Smart and others, to no good ends. Wee wish it otherwise.
In the meane while wee beseech your Lordship most humbly (both
Dr. Lindsell and my selfe) to continue your wonted and honorable
favour towards us, and giving credit to no objections till you
have heard us speak, alwaies to number us among those of whom
your Lordship may be right well assured they are ever observant
of your commands, and most ready to be ordered and guided by
your wisdome and fatherly directions. God encrease your dayes
and honour.
   Your Lordship's most truly and humbly addicted servant,
   Jo. Cosin.
   Durham, Octob. 22, 1631.
   To y=e= R=t=. R=d=. Father in God my very Hon=ble= good
Lord, y=e= Lord Bishop of London & one of y=e= LL.=s= of his
Ma=tie's= most hon=ble= privy Councell, these.

<Q COS 1637 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,220>
[} [\XCIX. - FROM DR. COSIN TO JOSEPH MEDE.\] }] 
   Sir,
You have been ten times as good as your word; for every copie of
your book that you sent me (besides mine owne) I have had many
solemn thanks returned me from those friends here upon whom I
bestowed them, all which I returne and bestow upon you againe.
They read it over and over, and are so well affected with it,
that wee all say here (except one, of whom I shall tell you
hereafter) it will certainly conduce to the settling of men's
minds and judgments in this question, more than all the other
writings which have gone forth about it.
<P I,221>
   2. It was well you wrote to my Lord's Grace of Canterbury,
and that your letter was so well accepted by him. I am now
writing to him myselfe; and I shall not faile to doe you all the
good offices that I can, as you well deserve.
   3. Since my comeing from Peterhouse, there is a little organ
bestowed upon us, for the scholars' private practice of singing
in the parlour. They write me word from thence, that, if it were
once put in tune, it might be of good use to us. I shall
therefore desire you that you would suffer (^your^) workman
(whom I think wee may best trust) as soon as you can spare him,
to bestow a little pains upon it; if, for that purpose, Mr.
Norwich, or some other of our fellows, shall come and make
request unto you.
   4. News here is none, but of their (^Stone Sunday^) (as they
call it) from Scotland: Where, the very last Sunday but one,
after the reading of the new Service Book in the Cathedral
Church at Edinburgh, they had like to have slaine their bishop
with (^stones^) , and pulled him all to pieces, for bringing in
among them (as they said) the (^new English Masse^) . The tumult
and uproar was made by 2000 of the baser sort of people, but set
on, as it is thought, by others. The complaint is gone up to the
King, and in the meane while many are in hold. This in Edinburgh
Cathedrall. For, in the King's chapel there, and in four other
dioceses besides, the liturgie is accepted with all alacritie,
and performed with as much diligence as any where among us. I
commend my love heartily to you, and rest, your assured friend,
   Jo. Cosin.
   Durham, 4 Aug. 1637.
   To the worshipful my very good friend, Mr. Joseph Mede,
fellow of Christ's College, Cambridge.

<Q COS 1638 WMILBOURNE>
<A WILLIAM MILBOURNE>
<G M>
<P I,221>
[} [\C. - FROM WILLIAM MILBOURNE, CURATE OF BRANCEPETH, TO DR.
COSIN.\] }] 
   Right Worshipfull,
My humble service remembred to you and to M=ris=. Cosin. I have
forborne to write unto you because wee had nothing
extraordinarie
<P I,222>
falne out in the parish, but the seducing of George Dowthwaite's
wife to Poperie, which, what strange tumults it wrought, I doubt
not but Mr. Leigh hath related unto you, hee being an 
eye-witnesse of some of them. But for the conclusion of all at
the Sessions last Richard Fawdon can declare it unto you.
   Robert Barker hath sawne timber for sieling the roofe of the
middle alley in the Church; and hee saith that it shall be
finished this summer. But now hee is, and hath bene long at
Sedgefield, about new seating the Church there. I pray God wee
get offering money enough to pay for the worke: for the
offerings this yeare came but to 6=li=. 3=s=. 5=d=., whereof a
third parte goeth to the poore; and Robert is to have 9=li=. for
his worke, besides the timber allowed him.
   When M=ris=. Cosin was at Branspeth last, shee spake to mee
to make a note of all the timber in the parsonage yard.
Whereupon, I, with the helpe of Robert Barker, tooke an exact
view of all, measureing everie piece that was worth any thing,
and setting their contents downe in a booke. And now I send unto
you a copie thereof, here inclosed; together with myne accompt
of moneyes received and disbursed for 3 quarters of a yeare. We
like well our new lord, Mr. Cole, for his liberalitie to the
poore. Hee sent at Christmas 20=s=. for them, and other 20=s=.
at Easter: and yesterday (the Court being at Branspeth) hee gave
mee 10=s=. to be distributed among them.
   I hope my brother of London hath bene mindfull to send you
some of the bookes of that copie which I made bold with your
worship to read before it went to the presse, intitled by mee
(\Sapientia clamitans\) . The two first treatises in it (as I
heare) are Dr. Jackson's, which I allwayes suspected by the
stile; as you may remember I sayd unto your worship. And the
other (some say) is a sermon of Dr. Donne's. I am mightilie
vexed at my brother, because it is so printed upon the title
page as that men being unacquainted with the matter take mee as
the authour,
<P I,223>
and not as the publisher onelie. I gave one of them to my Lord
of Durham, signifying the truth, that I was onelie the
publisher. His Lordship (I heard) read it, but liked not the
opinions in it. I was with him afterwards, but hee sayd nothing
at all to mee about it: yet I thought I saw in his countenance
some alteration from that which it used to be to mee formerly.
On the contraire I heare by Mr. Duncon that my Lord of Norwich,
having one presented to his Lordship at their first coming
forth, read it, and gave it a verie high commendation.
   Thus, with my wife's humble dutie to your worship and M=ris=.
Cosin, I humblie take my leave, committing you to the protection
of God, and resting,
   Your Worship's to be commanded,
   Willm. Milbourne.
   Branspeth, April 20. 1638.
   To the right wor=ll=. and my verie good friend, M=r=. D=r=.
Cosin, y=e= Master of St. Peter's Colledge, in Cambridge.

<Q COS 1639 RSTEWARD>
<A RICHARD STEWARD>
<G M>
<P I,225>
[} [\CII. - FROM DR. RICHARD STEWARD TO DR. COSIN.\] }] 
   Sir,
Yesterday there was a peace signed. The Scottish army is
disbanding, his Majestie's castles will bee speedily delivered.
There is an assembly indicted at Edenburgh Aug. 6, and a
Parliament
<P I,226>
Aug. 20, where his Majesty is by promise to bee in person. But
for the poore Church I can tell you little, only I hope well,
and I have good groundes for my hope, if thinges bee not marr'd
in the handling. Were I with you I could tell you something in
your eare, but will only write my selfe,
   Yours most assured,
   Rich. Steward.
   Campe, Jun: 19. 1639.
   I am trobled for the poore Church. God Almighty send things
settle well.
   To my very worthy freind, D=or=. Cosin, Canon of Durham.

<Q COS 1645? RSTEWARD>
<A RICHARD STEWARD>
<G M>
<P I,227>
[} [\CIV. - FROM DR. STEWART (PROBABLY TO DR. COSIN.)\] }] 
   Sir,
When I told you our gratious Master was in better constitution
of body then heretofore, I conceav'd I had fully satisfied you.
<P I,228>
For though I both found and left him in those principles you
speake off, yet I could not but imagine that his so Princely and
Christian carrige ever since that time had made this so plaine
to the world, that the attestation of my letters had been to as
little purpose as to adde a ray to the sun.
   For the Uxbridge business I cannot but continue in my former
opinion. Yet, Sir, your desires have that power with mee as to
make mee act to the contrary were I here able to serve you in
that particular, but my papers being from mee, and they not
sufficient wholy to doe your businesse without some helpe from
others which now are in the handes of a freind or two (whom by
God's blessing wee may one day speake with) I shall bee a sutor
to you for your pacience in this thing, and that you would bee
pleas'd to rest satisfied with this faithfull promise that I
will observe your commaunds, so soone as I am free into a
condition to obay you.
   'Tis not, I thinke, possible for mee to satisfy you about my
L[\ord\] of Cant[\erbury\] since if all I knew were put downe
'tis not sufficient to doe him right. A man hee was very much a
Christian, of great integrity of minde, both toward Church and
State. And though in some malitious braines his booke did not
cleare him from the taxe of Popery, I am confident his death
did: so that ever since I have not observ'd that in any pamphlet
of theirs they have cast that fond aspersion so much as upon the
King himselfe. Before hee died they did not believe themselves,
but since his martyrdome (for so it was) they could not so much
as hope to draw others to beleive &c. 'Tis true that hee had but
little love in the Court, and 'tis as true that it was cheifly
for this reason, because hee there found so little honesty:
there being but few of the greater quality whom hee had not some
time or other much contestation with, either in defending his
Master from abuse, or the Church from injury. But whether this,
and many the like trueths, bee fit for the pen of an historian,
I must wholy leave to your judgment: as being confident you
remember both that speach and the author of it, "That if a man
follow trueth too neare at the heeles, he may perhapps loose his
teeth." What great thinges hee design'd when hee was put into
power, and how many of those designes
<P I,229>
hee brought to perfection, a scribler (you wot off) hath donne
him the favour to put out in his Diary: a booke that, because
'twas publish'd by an adversary, has been farre the more for his
honour, though hee owe nothing to that wild brute who put it
out, because for want of naturall logicke hee conceav'd it had
made against him. What hee alter'd in the Church was only to
bring her nearer unto the rule of her owne Reformation; that is,
the text as 'twas understood and practis'd in the best and most
primitive times. This I can adde farther, that hee had an
inclination to have alter'd the too frequent use of the oath
(\ex officio\) in the High Commission; at least to have proposed
his conceipt of it in Parliament, and to have had it regulated
(as much as in him lay) by the helpe of some well studied law,
but not to abolish it, because 'tis of so great use in all kind
of goverments. For his morralls, all know hee liv'd not only
free from scandall, but his life was exemplary, and fit for a
Bishop, both in regard of his hospitality and of other his good
workes, which were indeed of a very eminent greatnesse, if they
bee compar'd with his fortune. I had said enough had I said no
more then this, that hee was very free from covetousnesse, and a
very excellent freind.
   I find that sentence you name in Grotius, and in that very
page you quote, 270, edit: Amster: in fol: (\Reges qui bello
solenni victi, regnoque exuti sunt, cum aliis regni bonis et jus
legandi perdiderunt\) . These are his owne wordes, and I
conceave they hold true, (\jure gentium\) . And, for
satisfaction to your last quaere, I shall only returne you some
more of his owne wordes, as the best commentary on him selfe:
[^LATIN OMITTED^] Those rites hee names Lib. III. c. 3. The
cheife of them is publicke denunciation, of which hee thus there
speakes [^LATIN OMITTED^] 
<P I,230>
   I rest, Sir,
   Your honor's most humble servant,
   [\Rich. Steward.\]
[\UNDATED. PROBABLY WRITTEN IN 1695.\]

<Q COS 1651 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,278>
[} [\CVIII. - FROM DR. COSIN TO DR. STEWARD.\] }] 
   Paris. April 7, 1651.
   Sir,
Yours of the 15 March (which was sent me by the L. H.) begins
with a complaint that you have not heard from me for a long
time, wherunto I can returne no other answere but that I wrote
to you not long since by Antwerp in Dr. Morley's letter,
afterwards by Mr. Crowther in his letter, and after that againe
by a letter directed to yourself, at Mr. Browne's house in the
Acheroom at the Hage.
   In the last I tolde you somewhat of your votary, who wilbe (I
feare) too volatile and slippery for either you or me to hold
with any tye whatsoever. You may doe well to propound such cases
of conscience as I doe: whether it be lawfull to goe against
one's conscience? to doe that wilfully which they know will
offend God and all good people? to refuse the Sacrament at
Easter in that church which yet they daily frequent? to beare us
in hand they stay still with us to be satisfied, having before
hand made a desperate resolution not to receive any satisfaction
at all? but to delay a while for the credit of the cause, least
it should look like a thing too rashly done; which yet was done
at 2 houres warning after the letter (wherof I told you) had bin
received, and some other such discontents suddenly reflected on?
for this resolution (forsooth) was taken and told to others,
(that will hold it fast) before ever either you or I must heare
of it. If afterwards wee have any thing to say, they will give
us the heareing, and then an end; but the affront shalbe the
greater, for then it shalbe given out, that wee said what wee
could and could avayle nothing. Yet for all this, if you will
write, I have promise and vow both made to me that your letter
shall not be seene by any other but
<P I,279>
the party alone to whom you send it, and to mee. And truly it
were not amisse if you wrote a chiding (no perswading) letter,
for that may perhaps doe some good.
   Your G. [\? gold\] is still safe. I would I knew how to doe
more service then I have done for you with the L. H. [\? Lord
Hatton.\] who sayes he wilbe true to you, but complaynes every
day for want of money, which the sequestrator delayes still in
the tenants' hands. They talk much here of my L[\ord\]
Jerm[\yn\] going into Scotland, whether the K[\ing\] hath
earnestly invited him, but I know not what to believe of it. The
D[\uke\] of Y[\ork\] is not yet provided for here, and till that
be, he will not
<P I,280>
be invited higher. The alterations are many in the French Court,
but I have no skill in them.
   Dr. Dunc[\on\] is gone againe into Italy, and I am left here
alone, where the weekely taske that I must live on will kill me,
as it has already made me as leane as Lent.
   When the D[\uke\] has wherewithall, it wilbe very graciously
done of him to supply the wants of them that need.
   Sir, I am
   Your most affectionate and humble servant,
   J. C[\osin\] .
   M=ris=. Hodges sends her service, and her receipt here
inclosed. I pray, Sir, let this letter inclosed be given or sent
safely to Dr. Morly, as soone as may be. I know not where he is.
   For my R=d=. friende, Mr. Deane Steward, Deane of the King's
Chappell, These, in Holland, at Breda, or the Hage.

<Q COS 1651 RSTEWARD>
<A RICHARD STEWARD>
<G M>
<P I,280>
[} [\CIX. - FROM DEAN STEWARD TO DR. COSIN.\] }] 
   Hage, May 24. 1651.
   Sir,
The Duke's invitation to France being yet, it seemes, uncertain
with you, hath staid him now at this place, and though his
H[\ighness\] should come to you, I am in some doubt whether I
shall attend him or no; for some reasons I shall acquaint you
with when it shall please God that we may meet: but for the
wordes of Sir H. Wo: I heed them not, being a person that
altereth his mind with the time, as the French doe their exchang
of monies.
   By way of answeare I have receav'd my L[\ady\] Kil. letter,
<P I,281>
which I pray thanke her Ladyship for, and let her know that I
therefore reply not, least I should be troblesome to no purpose,
but when the gayety of this new chang is pass'd, I hope to find
a time when it may be for her good to troble her, especially if
the good newes which we lately heard from Scotland be true; but
I must heare more before I send it you. Pray keepe the letter
safe by you which I sent her.
   I have acquainted Mr. Crowther with the bookes provided for
the Princesse Royall, and that they are to be put into Sir
Edward Hyde's hands, of whose entertainment with you I pray send
me worde in your next.
   The sequestration I feare will signify but little, although
it were taken off, as I sent you word not long since, nor know I
what to say but that wantes will shortly, I feare, come upon me,
and I may pinch while another hath so unworthily consum'd my
mony. I shall not be so uncivill as to desire you to put your
selfe to any troble for my sake that may hazard the good opinion
you have with that Person, only pray still doe me the best
offices you can without prejudice to your selfe, and send me
word by the next whether, if the Duke come to Paris, that Person
will not remove himselfe: for if I doe come to you I may
perhapps tell him a tale in his eare. I extreamly pitty your
condition, and would mend it did I know how, but those 2 divines
I mervaile not at.
   Sir, I am truly yours,
   R. S[\teward.\]
   For my reverend freind the Deane of Peterburgh, at the
Louvre.

<Q COS 1656 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,286>
[} [\CXII. - FROM DR. COSIN TO MR. SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Sir,
I received the favour of your letter, and that which you were
pleas'd to send with it, by the hands of this gentleman whom you
recommended to me; and truly I am so much in love with him
already that as I should have taken delight to doe him any
service, so am I sory to part with him so soone. But what ever
his suddaine revocations be, which will not suffer him to stay
here any longer for the present, yet I thinke he goes away from
us (\cum animo revertendi\) ; and when I shall have the honour
to see him againe, I will make it my busines to be better
acquainted with him, and be ready upon all occasions to attend
those good offices which you mention, or wherein I may be any
way usefull and serviceable to him.
   In the meane while, he will have the pleasure and benefit of
being neere to you, whose religious and prudent instructions
<P I,287>
have already render'd him so great a lover of virtue, and fix'd
such principles of faith and good life in him, that by the grace
of God he will remaine most constant and true to them all. I am
right glad to heare still (as I have bin told by divers persons
heretofore) how firme and unmov'd you continue your owne
standing in the midst of these great and violent stormes that
are now rais'd against the Church of England, which, for my
part, notwithstanding the outward glory, and dresse that she
had, be in these evill times taken from her, yet I honour and
reverence above all the other churches of the worlde: for she
beares upon her, more signally then any other that I know does,
the marks of Christ, which, when all is done, wilbe our greatest
glory.
   For the favour which you sent me I render you many thanks,
and though you call it (\tantillum\) , yet it will help me to a
greater purchase then I should have bin able here to have made
without it, (\totus enim sum in conquirendis bonis libris\) .
And besides, the token is the more acceptable to me, because it
comes from a person whose worth and virtue is at a high value
with me, and of whose good acquaintance I have bin long
desirous. Mr. Damport (who truly is (\ad mentem meam\) ) will
say the rest, and tell you after what condition wee make shift
here to live in this place, where I am, Sir,
   Your most affectionate and humble servant,
   J. Cosin.
   Paris: Feb=r=. 3 1656.
   For my very worthy and honor'd friend, Mr. W. Sandcroft, at
London.

<Q COS 1659 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,288>
[} [\CXIV. - FROM DR. COSIN TO MR. SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Paris, June 26. 1659.
   Sir,
By the order which you were pleased to give unto Mr. J. Abeels
of Amsterdam, I have here at Paris received 119 crownes
tourneis; which being so great a supply to my present condition,
and comming from so good a hand as yours is, layeth a very great
obligation upon me to returne you my most thankfull
acknowledgment of your speciall kindnes and favour to me herein.
It may well be that I am in this particular likewise beholden to
Mr. Gayers, of whose generous freedome and (\bonte`\) I have had
divers testimonies heretofore. Mr. Abeel's letter names him not,
but yet I heard from Mr. Damport some while since, that you and
he were together at Utrecht, where I beseech God to send his
best blessings upon you both. I have of late lost the force of
my reading eye, (having never had but one for that purpose) and
I am endeavouring every day, by the art and help of the most
skilful oculists here, to recover it againe, wherof they put me
<P I,289>
in good hope, when the cattarhaque is once come to maturity,
which they say will be about 8 or 10 months hence. In the meane
while, not to be able to read (nor to write but by guesse, as
now I doe) is the greatest misery that ever yet befell me. I
desire Mr. Gayers and you to accept my thanks, and with the
continuance of your good affection to me to let me have the
benefit of your prayers, who am, Sir,
   Your most assured and humble servant,
   J. Cosin.
   For my very much honor'd fr=d=. Mr. William Sandcroft, att
Utrecht, or elsewhere, These.

<Q COS 1659 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P I,289>
[} [\CXV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM JOHN COSIN TO
WILLIAM SANDCROFT^]
   Paris, Aug. 28. 1659.
   Sir,
I have received yours of Aug. 9, but my sight is so obstructed
(as it hath bin now these 5 or 6 months together) with a
catarraque in both my eyes, that I cannot, without much
difficulty, either read or write any letters. Yet I neglected
not to make my acknowledgment in writing, and to give you thanks
for what you ordered to be paid unto me here at Paris in June
last, though it should seeme my letter is not yet come to your
hands. And therfore I will here renew my thankfullnes to you
againe, being more obliged to you for the severall good supplyes
you have bin pleas'd to make and procure to me then I am any way
able to recompense. And what I say to you, I beseech you say for
me to Mr. Robert Gayer, whom I have great reason, among others
that freely disperse their piety, to affect and honour. His
intended journey and yours into Italy, (where you can see little
els but vice and vanity,) if God blesse our hopes now begun in
our owne country, will be soone at an end. For wee are here
assured that there is in England a considerable armie of ten
thousand about Chester, and divers others in severall parts of
the Kingdome, that are resolv'd to put off their new masters,
and to call in the King, who with his brother the Duke of York,
is already gone that way, to attend God's good pleasure and
blessing upon us all.
   I am glad to heare from you that my history of the Scripture
canon pleased you so well: but it was my late sitting up at
nights to follow that work that lost me the vigour of my eyes,
and will now retard me, till I recover my sight, from perfecting
<P I,290>
any other such treatise, which I intended to publish, wherof
that which Dr. Morley shewed you, if God give me leave, is like
to be the first.
   Of Dr. Duncon's purpose to doe any thing, either about our
ordination or other subject, I never heard, and I give the lesse
credit to that report which you had of him, because I have not
heretofore observed any inclination in him to bend his studies
that way, and now all his imployment is to make sermons before
the English merchants at Ligorne and Florence, where (if your
journey should hold through Italy) you will be sure to find him.
   Of Mons=r=. De Labadie I am able to say little, but I have
bin inform'd here by those that knew him well, that he was never
either Franciscan or Oratorian, but brought up a while among the
Jesuites, whom he forsooke, and afterwards became a chanoine in
Picardie, and a zealous preacher there, from whence, upon
Cardinal Richlieu's displeasure stirr'd up against him, he
remov'd to Languedoc, and changing his religion first became
minister at Montaban, then at Orange, from whence he was invited
to the French Congregation at the Chappel by Somerset house in
London, but being offered better conditions at Geneva, there you
find him. The motives of his conversion I have not seen, but
they here that have both read them and know him well, though
otherwise they speak well of him, give no great commendations of
his books, and I shall not seek after them til my eyes be better
able to read them then now they are.
   Your inclosed letter to Mr. Abdy in London I sent away by the
English post upon Wednesday last, and to morrow night I shall
send the other by the Holland post to Mr. Honywood.
   When the books that you have bought at Geneva, or ought els,
come hither to my hands, I shall take care to preserve them
safely for you, till you be pleased to dispose further of them.
I write hastily at a guesse, with my eyes at my pen's end, the
faults wherof you wilbe pleas'd to pardon, and to continue your
good affection to, Sir,
   Your most assured and humble servant,
   J. Cosin.
   My service humbly presented to Mr. Gayer.
   (\A Monsieur, Monsieur Sandcroft, Gentilhomme Anglois, chez
Monsieur Perrot, Rue des Chanoins, a` Geneve.\)

<Q COS 1660 TSHADFORTH>
<A THOMAS SHADFORTH>
<G M>
<P II,3>
[} [\II. - FROM THOMAS SHADFORTH, ESQ., TO DR. COSIN.\] }] 
   Right Worshipfull Sir,
The hearinge of your safe arrivall at London is great joye and
comfort to all your relations at Eppleton, for which great
blissinge my heart doth praise the Lord, and all that is within
me praise his holy name. The Lord doth execute righteousnesse
and judgment for all them that are oppressed with wronge. And
haveing allso notice that it was the generall course of all the
Clergie in your condition to give coppies of a declaration to
the tenants in present possession of all the personages,
vicarages, gleb lands, and other theire former rights, to
intitle them to all the present profits, and allso in case of
opposition to inable them to have a tryall at law the next
assizes; I have, on your behalfe, bene at Branspeth, Ellwicke,
and the Little-towne, neare Pittington halle garth, and don for
you accordingly. I hope there will be noe opposition of any;
unlesse by Mr. Midford, who purchased the Little-towne, formerly
yours. Mr. Christopher Michelton is sollicitor for you, who will
retaine counsell, that a
<P II,4>
tryall may be had the nest assises, in case he stand out. I
desire to have two lines from you, how you approve of what is
done, and what further commands you will lay upon me. Delay
would be prejuditiall to you, wherefore let me heare from you by
the first post. Your relations at Eppleton doe give theire best
saluts and love to you, and soe doth he who is, Sir,
   Your loveinge brother to serve you,
   Thomas Shadforth.
   Eppleton, y=e= 16th of June, 1660.
   For the right worshipfull and highly hon=rd=. Doctor Cosins,
these present, London.

<Q COS 1660 CMICKLETON>
<A CHRISTOPHER MICKLETON>
<G M>
<P II,6>
[} [\V. - FROM MR. CHRISTOPHER MICKLETON TO THE SAME.\] }] [^TO
JOHN COSIN^]
   Sir,
Upon Munday, the 30th of July [\SIC, SED.? June\] , I preferred
your petition, which you signed the Saturday night before,
together with Dr. Naylor's, Dr. Basire's, and Mr.
<P II,7>
Smith's, and afterwards, I procured Orders for you to this
effect, viz.,
   " (\Die Sabbathi, 23 Junij, 1660.\) Ordered by the Lords in
Parliament assembled, That all Tythes, Glebes, and other
profitts of or belonging to the Rectory of Elwick in the county
of Durham, and other ecclesiasticall living or benefice of John
Cosin, Doctor in Divinity, who hath beene sequestred or ejected
without due course of law in or since the times of the late
warrs, be, by authority hereof, stayed and secured in the hands
of the Churchwardens or Overseers of the poore of the said
Parish, until the title of the said sequestred John Cosin and
the present possessor thereof shall be determined by the further
Order of Parliament or Eviction by due course of Law."
   Which Orders I sente downe to Durham by the last Tuesday post
to be put in execution, and by my letter I desired my sonne to
send for your brother Shadforth and some of his sonnes, or whom
he should thinke fitt, and Mr. Blakeston to goe along with him
to Elwick about the securing of your tythes and profitts of your
Glebe there, from whom I have received a letter, dated 2
<P II,8>
August, in answer, to this purpose: That after he got to Durham
upon Munday 30 July he forthwith sent for Mr. Shadforth, who
came to him the day after to Durham, and my son gave him an
account of our proceedings, which Mr. Shadforth did well approve
of, and Mr. Shadforth appointed that he and Mr. Blakeston would
upon Friday next after goe with my son about your busines; after
which I expect to have a further accompt from him, which shall
be communicated to you by,
   Sir,
   Your very humble servant,
   Christofor Mickleton.
   Clifford's Inne, 7 Aug., 1660.
   For his hono=ble=. Friend, John Cosin, D=r=. of Divinity,
Deane of Peterborough.

<Q COS 1660 CMICKLETON>
<A CHRISTOPHER MICKLETON>
<G M>
<P II,8>
[} [\VI. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME, THEN BISHOP ELECT OF
DURHAM.\] }] [^FROM CHRISTOPHER MICKLETON TO JOHN COSIN^]
   My Lord,
I doe humbly and heartily congratulate your Lordship's happines
and ours in having so honorable a patron and champion for our
Church as your selfe to be our Bishop. I wish your honor long to
continue in that place amongst us. My Lord, I formerly certifyed
your honor by my letters that wee had obteined a verdict for you
at Durham, at the last Assises there held, against Bowy the
intruder, but upon Bowye's sollicitation and his counsellor's
intreaty they soe farre prevailed with the Judge that Bowy had
liberty to stay till the 23 of this Oct: to convey away his
goods, which was granted unto by your counsell, with the assent
of your brother Shadforth. Now of late I spoke with Mr.
Shadforth, who told me that your Lordship, or your sonne in law,
Mr. Burton, desired a copy of the Order which was made the last
Assises at the tryall, but because he, nor none for him, did
call upon me for it, I thought fit to send a copie thereof by
this post, which copie is here enclosed. I intend (God willing)
to waite upon your Lordship at London in the beginning of the
terme, where and when I desire to shew myselfe more serviceable
to your Lordship, and to be alwaies accounted what I really am,
   Your Lordship's humble and faithfull servant,
   Chr. Mickleton.
   Durham, Oct. 11, 1660.

<Q COS 1660 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,12>
[} [\X. - FROM DR. JOHN COSIN, BISHOP ELECT OF DURHAM, TO MR.
SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Sir,
Yesternight the Bishop of Carlisle brought me word that Dr.
<P II,13>
Ball must, of necessitie (as he alledgeth) bee at Ely upon the
day when we are to be consecrated; and therefore wee are now
become solecitors to you, as I told you my intention was before,
to undertake the preaching of the sermon; which will bee most
thankfully acknowledged as a speciall kindnes and favour done
both to the Bishops of Carlile and Chester, and to
   Sir,
   Your most affectionate friend
   And servant in Christ,
   Jo. Dunelm: (\Electus\) .
   Durham House Nov. 13, 1660.
   The Consecration day is like to be upon Sunday sevenight, the
25 day of this moneth.
   For Mr. Sancroft, at Mr. Beamont's, a Bookeseller's house in
little Britaine, without Aldersgate.

<Q COS 1660 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,14>
[} [\XII. - FROM BISHOP COSIN TO MR. SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Sir,
Being otherwise diverted yesterday, I forgot to aske you in what
forwardnesse your sermon was at the presse. I pray take care
that it may be printed on a faire paper, and with a good large
<P II,15>
letter. I hope you ommitt not to insert the forme of your prayer
at full length after the division of your text, and in case you
have not given order for it, or that the presse hath passed
beyond it, I desire you would prevaile with Mr. Beaumont to
print that leafe over again. To-morrow I will looke for your
company at dinner. (\Caetera cum veneris.\)
   I am, Sir,
   Your very loving friend,
   Jo. Duresme.
   For Mr. Sancroft.

<Q COS 1661 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,21>
[} [\XVI. - FROM THE SAME TO MR. SANCROFT.\] }] [^FROM JOHN
COSIN^]
   Sir,
I received yours of August 13, immediately after my solemne
reception into the Church, and singing the (\Te Deum\) there,
wherein there was nothing wanting but your assistance. The
confluence and alacritie both of the gentry, clergie, and other
people was very greate; and at my first entrance through the
river of Tease there was scarce any water to be seene for the
multitude of horse and men that filled it, when the sword that
killed the dragon was delivered to me with all the formality of
trumpets and gunshots and acclamations that might be made. I am
not much affected with such showes, but, however, the
cheerfullness of the country in the reception of their Bishop is
a good earnest given for better matters which, by the grace and
blessing of God, may in good time follow here among us all.
   It is now high time to resolve what you will doe in taking or
refusing the Vicarage of Norton, which is situated in a pleasant
place of this country, about six miles from the sea, the fresh
river running by it, and worth eight or nine score pounds (\per
annum\) . If you will take it untill a better falls, it shall be
yours; otherwise I pray write to Dr. Herbert about it, and tell
him the
<P II,22>
conditions of it; if he will provide that his owne small
benefice which he now holds in Suffolk may be left to Mr.
Glanvile (as he undertooke it should) Norton shall be his; which
he will like the better for the neighbourhood and company of my
High Sheriffe (Sir Thomas Davison), who is seated in that
parish. Let me have either your resolution or Dr. Herbert's in
this particular as soone as you can, and if you cannot be
perswaded to take it, I hope you will prevaile so farre with
yourself, as to come along with him into this country, where you
shall with all gladness be received by, Sir,
   Your most assured and affectionate friend,
   Jo. Duresme.
   Our ship is not yet arrived, which keeps me at Durham. - Aug.
22, 1661.
   For Mr. Wm. Sandcroft at his lodging in Covent Garden, or
elsewhere in London, These.

<Q COS 1661 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,22>
[} [\XVII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM JOHN COSIN
TO MR. SANCROFT^]
   Sir,
Your letter of Aug. 20 came to me after this other of mine,
herewith sent, was sealed up, and gone to the post. I have but
little time to adde and say more than that I shall be glad to
welcome you into this diocese, with a canonry of Durham and the
Rectory of Houghton, which, if Dr. Barwick and Mr.
<P II,23>
Triplet leave them, will be only in my donation; for his
Majestie is to bestow nothing as patron (\pro ha`c vice\) but
where he promotes the former incumbent to a Bishoprick, the
change of one Deanery for another being no promotion. But you
may assure your selfe and my Lord of London that I will bestow
the prebend and the parsonage both upon you, presupposing that
you will continue my household chapleyne at Aukland till you
have made your prebend's house at Durham (which is much
ruinated) and the parsonage house at Houghton fitt for your
better habitation. I pray tell the gentilwoman whom you name in
the end of your letter that I take her message and
acknowledgment sent to me very kindly from her: of whom I have a
very good opinion, and if you have so too, I think you cannot
choose a better companion as housekeeper both at Houghton and
Durham than so virtuous a person as she is, is like to make, if
you would take his judgment who is, Sir,
   Your affectionate friend,
   Jo. Duresme.
   Aug. 23, 1661.
   Present my service to my Lord of London (from whom I have not
heard otherwise than by you) and say to him that if I should
come from hence so soone as he would have me, I shall not be
able to provide that money which I promised for the King, nor
enough to mainteyne my self and my family all the winter in
London, where I spent before, and cannot hereafter defray the
charges requisite for house hire, table, and other expenses
necessary, then 30 (^l^) . a weeke. The repayres of my two
castles here have already taken up all or most of my rents. The
<P II,24>
country is exhausted by the late purchasers and growne very
poore. My lease fines are very small. My payments to the King,
the Queene, and my officers very great, and the late Parliament
took away from my Bishoprick more than a thousand pound (\per
annum\) .
   For Mr. Wm. Sandcroft, at his lodgings in Covent Garden, or
elsewhere in London.

<Q COS 1661 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,24>
[} [\XVIII. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM JOHN COSIN
TO MR. SANDCROFT^]
   Sir,
I have yours of Aug. 29, and shall expect D=r= Herbert's
answere. Though the Prebend and the Rectory will be in my gift,
when they become voyd, yet I shall most willingly not only
permitt you, but likewise advise you to make use of the favour
which my Lord of London hath offered to you, and to follow the
busines diligently, that it may be perfected. Mr. Triplet's
resignation may the more easily be had because there is another
prebend at Westminster ready for him, but I doe not heare either
from you or any body els what is provided or designed for Mr.
Deane Barwick, to procure his resignation or cession from
Houghton, though I perceive from him that he intends not to keep
it at such a distance as London is from it. Therefore (\res tuas
age\) . Let my Lord of London make your way, and be confident
that I will not putt you out of it.
   The prebendal house must bee most an end new built before it
will be an habitation fitt for you and any companion or
housekeeper you shall bring or send thither. What Houghton house
is I know not, but the Deane tells me it will cost a good summe
of money before it be put into a good condition.
   That vertuous person whom wee have now twice mentioned I
thinke will make a good companion for you and your sister both.
The great care and affection that you have for her, and the just
regard that she hath againe of you, may in good time prevayle
with you to alter your resolution which you formerly had to live
single; but doe as you thinke fitt to doe, and as God shall
incline your mind. In the mean while, I take not the
difficulties which you mention to be invincible either on her
part, or much considerable on the part of them upon whom you say
she depends; and truly there cannot be a greater act of charity
done
<P II,25>
for her than to take her out of the danger wherin she lives, and
prevent her falling into the fire. But I am not to presse you
further than your own inclination in a matter of this nature. I
am glad you will be with me about Michaelmas, and then wee may
discourse more of it if you please. Give her and all that aske
after me the salutes of, Sir,
   Your assured and affectionate friend,
   Jo. Duresme.
   Durham (from whence I am going to-morrow to Aukland), Sept.
3, 1661.
   For Mr. Sandcroft, at his lodgings in Covent Garden, London.

<Q COS 1661 GSHELDON>
<A GILBERT SHELDON>
<G M>
<P II,25>
[} [\XIX. - FROM THE BISHOP OF LONDON, TO BISHOP COSIN.\] }]
[^FROM GILBERT SHELDON^]
   My very good Lord,
I am confident that Dr. Barwicke and Dr. Sudbury will answer
both our expectations, and that we shall be happy in them. Dr.
Triplet gains little by the exchange, for he leaves his living
and prebend with you and two other prebends, one in York and
another in Salisbury; the person the king commends to you to
succed him in his living is one Mr. Tirwit, altogether unknown
to me, but often recommended to my care by the King, which I
wonder at, since upon enquiry I hear him to be a person of very
indifferent parts of learninge or prudence. I have a great
kindnes for Mr. Sancroft, and am glad that your Lordship hath so
too. When he is the King's Chaplayne for ought I know he is as
like to be fixed in your parts as anywhere else, but if there be
occasion to use him elsewhere I know you will not be too severe
to us if
<P II,26>
we take him from you. For those you recommend to me I shall give
your Lordship an account of my radines to serve them when we
meet, which must be at the beginninge of the Parliament, for the
King expects it from all of our order, and when his great
busines for his revennew and that of the Church is over any may
have liberty to returne to his dioces. He supposeth that none
amonge us is so inconsiderable but that he hath interest enough
in one or other to promote his busines more effectually than can
be done by a proxye.
   Mr. Brevint will I thinke ere longe come over, and so I will
leave him to looke after his owne busines.
   I begge your prayers, and rest
   Your Lordship's most affectionate
   Brother and Servant,
   Gilb. London.
   Sept. 3=d=, '61.

<Q COS 1661 MSTAPYLTON>
<A MILES STAPYLTON>
<G M>
<P II,27>
[} [\XX. - FROM MILES STAPYLTON, ESQ., TO MR. SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Sir,
Yours of August the 29th I have received, and shall give
particular answeres to your several questions in the same order
as they lie before me in your letter: and first, my Lord is
fully resolved to be at London against the sitting downe of the
Parliament, in the meane time, besides his owne private affairs,
he hath a great deale of business to doe here of publick
concerne, as, to confirme all the youth throughout his Diocese,
for which he hath set apart next Sunday, being the 15th instant,
the place the Cathedral of Durham: the 21st he setts apart for
the conferring of orders within the county of Durham at the said
Cathedral, and the beginning of October to doe the like for the
county of Northumberland, at Newcastle; where he will also call
a Synod, and afterwards will doe the like at Durham. Hee
preached last Sunday at Durham, and this day at this parish
church. 2=ly=, his lodgings, when he comes to Durham, is at Mr.
Farrer's house. 3=ly=, all his goods are safely arrived. 4=ly=,
his library is a setting up, the greatest part of the bookes he
hath here being up already, and the rest will be set up in a day
or two's time; the place he hath chose for it is the long
gallery at Awkland. 5=ly=, Mr. Ralph Blakiston, who presents his
service to you, officiats as his chaplaine until you come downe,
which I hope will not be prolonged beyond your intentions,
Michaelmass; for 6=ly=, the Deane must leave us, and Dr. Sudbury
comes in his roome, whose prebendary of Westminster is given to
Dr. Triplet, whose prebendary here I thinke I have very good
reason
<P II,28>
to beleeve my Lord will offer you, together with the Parsonage
of Houghton-le-Spring, which the Deane will resigne at his going
hence. And these much for your questions.
   Mr. Neile remembers his love to his sister, but is prevented
writing to her by my wive's letter to me, who hears she is going
beyond sea, which troubles Mr. Neile very much, and he saith he
cannot write to her but in tearmes that will trouble her, which
he believes the thought of her journey doth sufficiently. For he
imputes it all to her coming into my Lord's house, which he
saith he disswaded her from as much as he could. Mr. Cosin is at
present with my Lady Burton in Westmerland, and hath bin all the
last weeke. I hope this journey will refresh him, for I can
assure you he seemed very deepe sunck in malancholy, and truly I
cannot blame him. For he is so farre from being used as an only
sonne, that he is not used like a sonne at all. The occasion of
all I suppose you are all well acquainted with, therefore at
present I need say no further of it, and shall only adde that
Mr. Neile, Mr. Forder, Mr. Brignell do present their
<P II,29>
service to your selfe and Mrs. Neile, and that none can offer a
heart more devoted to the service of you both than he who is,
Sir,
   Your very affectionate friend and humble servant,
   Miles Stapylton.
   Awkland Castle, Septemb=r=. the 6=th=, 1661.
   For Mr. William Sandcroft at his lodgings in Mr. Beaumont's
house, a Bookseller, at the signe of the Star in Little
Brittaine (these are) London.

<Q COS 1661 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,30>
[} [\XXII. - BISHOP COSIN TO MR. SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Sir,
I have yours of Sept. 12, wherein I find no mention of the last
letter I sent to you, and inclosed it with many others to Mr.
Charles Gerard. The packet that came now with yours from
<P II,31>
France, was a letter from Mr. Brevin, and another from the
Princesse of Turenne, to whom if Mr. Durell please to write
concerning Bates and his designe (if any such designe be) he
will lose his journey. And I pray deale effectually with Mr.
Durell for that purpose, and bid him make free use of my name in
his letters. I am so full here of the Bishoprick affayres, that
I have not the least leisure for any thing els. Upon Sunday last
I had a solemne confirmation, with a sermon to that end before
it; and yesterday I had another; for the company was too great
to goe through with them all in one day, yet I admitted none but
those who were duly examined, and brought testimonies besides,
subscribed by their own ministers. Busie I am about the
reparations of my ruined houses, the very covering whereof with
lead and slate (not yet half done) hath cost me more than 500
(^l^) . In the meane while, having bin here 5 weeks, I have not
sealed more than 2 leases, nor received more than 70=li= fine
for the one, and 7=li=. for the other. The purchasers have made
the tenants so poore that they are not able to renew their
farmes, and I doubt it will be so meane an accompt which my
Commissioners will make me for the rest of my time which I have
to stay out here, that I shall returne with a very light purse,
and not be able to make good the promise which I subscribed and
sent to my Lord of London for his Majestie; yet, though I leave
my selfe nothing, that promise I must endeavour to performe; as
I trust he will do his to you for the parsonage of Houghton, and
the prebend of Durham, where you will find a miserable house,
and no president to recover any thing for dilapidations. Since
my Lord of London and Ely will have it so, I shall make all the
hast I can to be at London upon the beginning of November. The
next Sunday I am here to attend an ordination, and the 2 first
Tuesdays after Michaelmas an ordinary Synode of the Clergie, one
at Durham and another at Newcastle; where I shall preach among
them, and put them in some order, if by any fayre meanes I can.
My temporall Chancellour is here with me at his sitting in the
Chancery Court, and it is a great expense to me, without any
profit, as the Judges late being here was, which cost me
150=li=., besides 50=li=.
<P II,32>
more which they demand for their salarie. What Mr. Holdsworth
brings shall be welcome to me: and if Dr. Herbert comes before I
depart from hence, I shall put him into Norton, as I hope he
will doe Mr. Glanvile into his Suffolk benefice, which is not
half so good. For your owne journey hither, use your libertie:
and seing I am so soone to returne, let us meet (as by the grace
of God we shall) at London; where at M=ris=. Hatton's house in
Russell street, or rather in Westminster, neere where my Lord of
St. David's kept, I wish you could, a month or 6 weeks hence,
provide a private lodging of 3 or 4 rooms for me, and for your
self, together with 3 or 4 servants, for to this number and
privacy I must be forced to reduce my family, and to live with a
little, having not much to spend, as I have hitherto done, who
am, Sir,
   Your very affectionate friend,
   Jo: Duresme.
   Durham, Sept. 17, 1661.
   My daughters are at Aukland.
   For Mr. Wm. Sandcroft, to be left at Mr. Charles Gerard's
Lodgings neere the Bore's head in Henrietta Street, Covent
Garden, London.

<Q COS 1661 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,35>
[} [\XXIV. - FROM BISHOP COSIN TO MR. SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Sir,
I was (when I received your last letter) going to Newcastle,
where I stay'd from Saturday to Thursday, preach'd there and
communicated with many persons upon Sunday: I think the number
of people at the Sermon was no lesse then 3 or 4 thousand. On
Tuesday I kept the Synod of the Clergie, and made
<P II,36>
them my assessors in it, treating them so that I hope (and they
assured me all as much) they are well pleased with their Bishop,
even Mr. Durant himself, whom only I intreated and ordered to
forbeare preaching till he made it appeare that he was an
ecclesiasticall person, as he is not, having neither episcopall
nor presbiteriall ordination.
   Dr. Sudbury's house would have fitted me: Dr. Killagrew's is
too little, and I feare unfurnished. M=ris=. Hatton, therefore,
for want of a better, wilbe the fittest for me, at the weekly
rate which I paid before, and upon condition that those roomes
be allowed me which I had not before. I purpose (God willing) to
be there presently upon All Saints' Day. If I stay a week
longer, you shall have notice of it.
   I saw a letter to-day which tells us that the great
Presbyterian preacher in London is silenced; but the letter
names him not. I guesse it should be Mr. Baxter, and truly it is
high time he should hold his peace, for I think he hath tired
both himself and many others with much speaking.
   This enclosed you will present to my Lord of London, from,
Sir,
   Your assured friend,
   Jo. Duresme.
   Aukland, Octob. 11, 1661.
   For Mr. Wm. Sandcroft, at his lodgings in Covent Garden, or
elsewhere, in London.

<Q COS 1661 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,36>
[} [\XXV. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM JOHN COSIN TO
WILLIAM SANCROFT^]
   Sir,
I am now at Doncaster, and intend to be this night at Newark, on
Saturday and Sunday at Stamford, on Monday at Bugden, on Tuesday
at Hatfield, and on Wednesday (which is the last of this month
and Holymas Eve) at London, where you say
<P II,37>
M=ris=. Hatton's house will be ready for me. At my going away
from thence in November last there was a bed set up and left in
the dining roome, which if it be there still, I pray let it be
taken downe, and the roome left free.
   If any convenient place had bin found out about Tuttle
street, or somewhere neere the Parliament House, it would have
bin more private and more commodious for me then this in Russell
street wilbe, which is a thoroughfare for all company. What
order my steward Mr. Arden hath taken for stable roome I know
not. He is gone to Rufford, where Sir G. Savil is, and is to
meet me at Newark. One of my coach horses and my sumpter horse
are dead. I pray God bring me and all my company safe to our
journey's end.
   I am sorry Dr. Herbert cannot prevayle for Mr. Glanvile to
succeede him in his Suffolk benefice. However Norton is still
reserved for him, and I have ordered my receyvour to lend money
for the plowing and sowing of his glebe. In the meanewhile the
Church and the parishioners want a good minister to take care of
them, and mervayle that all this time of vacancie they should
not heare from Dr. Herbert, who hath bin recommended to them by,
   Your assured and affectionate friend,
   Jo. Duresme.
   Doncaster, Oct, 25, 1661.
   God send my daughter a good houre. Where she or her husband
or Sir Gilbert is I know not, nor the addresse I am to make unto
your lodging, and therefore I write to you by Mr. Garthwait.
   For Mr. William Sandcroft at his lodgings in London. Leave
this with Mr. Timothy Gartwaite, Stationer, next the little
doore north of St. Paul's church in London To be speedyly
delivered.

<Q COS 1662 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,86>
[} [\XXXII. - FROM BISHOP COSIN TO MR. STAPYLTON.\] }] 
   London, Jan. 22, 1661[\-62.\]
   Mr. Stapleton,
I had your letter from Yorke, and that which you sent me from
Durham, together with the inclosed from Gravesend; whether
[\whither\] that windbound gentleman had (I believe) never come
to waite for a wind that will carry him to his undoing if Mr.
Farrar had not furnished him with money (which I never ordered
him) for his voyage. But let him goe, he is not worth the
owning, nor any further seeking after him. In the meane while
they that have thus lured him and conveyed him away are most
unworthy persons.
   You will now have time to looke after the house at Aukland
and Durham, and all other things that may concerne me in my
rents, leases and accompts.
   It is well that the gentlemen at the Sessions were persuaded
to pass over that busines for Knights and Burgesses so quietly.
<P II,87>
To the letters that I had about it, and about their desire for
my moving here in Parliament to obteyne our 25000=li=., I shall
returne answeres hereafter by the posts that follow this. So I
pray excuse me till then both to Sr. Tho. Davison, if you meet
him at Durham, and to the Sollicitor, and to Mr. Farrar.
(\Vale.\)
   Yours, &c.
   Joh. Duresme.
   Send word by Mr. Farrar to Mr. Barnes at Darlington that I
desire to know what he will doe about the mill, for I shall stay
no longer upon his delay and uncertainties. Let me know also
what Mr. Wilkinson hath done with his lease ground neare the
Bishop's house there, and what that lease of his [{is{] worth. I
heare of one Mr. Rayne hath either bought it, or contracted for
it, and that he is willing to part with it againe; as it may
well be Mr. Barnes will be ready also to part with his Balywick,
&c., for all which Mr. Charles Gerard, if he may have them at no
uneasy rate, would peradventure deale with them, for to him I
have allotted the House, and the office and otes at
Cotammundevill.
   [\Jo. Duresme.\]
   For Mr. Miles Stapleton, at Mr. Farrar's house in Durham.
   Jo. Duresme.

<Q COS 1662 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,90>
[} [\XXXVI. - FROM BISHOP COSIN TO MR. STAPYLTON.\] }] 
   London. Feb. 13. 1661[\-62.\]
   Mr. Stapleton,
With all the skill wee can use here, your accompt, and Mr.
Bowser's accompt of the difference betweene the high and flatt
roofs at Aukland, &c., wee cannot bring to any agreement. The
staires you propose to be new made at Durham Castle wilbe better
if they be deferred till my coming thither to order them to my
mind; for if the outward stone case be not made to answere the
Towre at the other end of the gallery leading up to the
chappell, I shall not like the cost of a new stayre, which the
carpenter setts at so high a rate, and whether he intends to
allow wood or no, or how many half paces, or of what bredth and
height the steps shalbe, you doe not say. Nor doe you tell me
what roomes are there finished, fitt to lodge me and 3 or 4
servants in, when I come to Durham, for out of the Castle I
would not willingly bee quartered any more, (during the short
time I shall have occasion to stay there) though I thinke that
house will not be ready this yeere for the entertainment of the
Judges at the Assises.
   Your very loving and assured friend,
   Jo. Duresme.
   For Mr. Miles Stapylton, at Mr. John Farrer's house at
Durham.
   Jo. Duresme Franco.

<Q COS 1662 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,94>
[} [\XXXVIII. - FROM BISHOP COSIN TO MR. STAPYLTON.\] }] 
   Mr. Stapleton,
I hope you passe your time in Houdenshire to some good purpose,
as well for the finishing of the accompt and repayre of the
staiths, as for all other matters concerning rents, leases,
officers, and perquisits of Courts there, belonging to me.
<P II,95>
   If Mr. Bell hath in your judgment deserved twenty marks for
his care and paines taken about the staiths, let him have that
allowance for his reward; but let him first draw up his book of
accompt in such forme as wilbe fitt to be kept among my other
rolls of accompt in the Exchequer at Durham.
   Perfect the accompt in a roll with Dr. Broome, and therein
allow him the x=l=. fee for the yeere 1661, and for the former
yeere, or part of 1660, give him what gratuity you shall think
fitt, according to the paines he tooke for the gathering in of
the rents, and the proportion of those rents hee received for
me. If he will not enter good bond (that is, by himself and
others with him) to secure me my rents and perquisits of Court
which he shall receive for me hereafter, you must of necessity
endeavour to find out and imploy some other responsable person,
who will upon those termes undertake the office, for though I
doe not any way question Dr. Broome's honestie and true
intention, yet I know his mortalitie, and may well make a
question of it, without his offence, whether he be sure to live
a day after he hath received one half yeer's rent for me; and if
he should happen to die (as wee are all subject to that
uncertainty) before the money be sent or paid to me, I would be
loth to depend upon his Executors, without a bond to require of
them what was in his hands. If, rather then give any such bond,
he will needs quitt his office, as he hath often in his letters
expressed himself to that purpose, truly I shall think that he
doth himself the greatest injury in it, but peradventure having
far better imployments he thinkes this too meane for him, and is
therefore willing to leave it; in which case one Mr. Tomson of
York, (sonne to Mr. Anth. Tomson, late the Bishop of Durham's
Register) and one Mr. Dalby of Lincolnshire, (sonne to Mr. or
Dr. Dalby, a Divine well knowne) are recommended to me, as
persons faithfull and fitt for such an office. And if Dr. Broome
puts you to it, you shall doe well to enquire after them, or
some other, for that purpose.
   I have yet made no patent or grant of the Steward's place;
only, till I should dispose of it, I intreated Mr. Delaval to
provide some lawyer dwelling neere those parts to keep the
<P II,96>
courts, and to take care that the under-steward did his duty as
well towards the tenants in entering their coppies, as towards
the Lord in estreating his perquisitts; neither of which, you
say, hath bin regarded. Mr. Delaval will look no longer after
it; therefore the Bishop of Lincolne hath commended one Mr.
Mellis, an able and honest lawyer, to me for that purpose, who
dwells at Lincolne, which they say, is but a day's journey from
Houden. If wee be not the better fitted wee had best resolve
upon him: but, in the meane while, by vertue of the commission
which I sent to you, I pray take care that the Court be kept.
   And thus I have gone over all that concernes me (as farre as
I know yet) in Houdenshire, unless it be the 100=l=. allotted me
by the Commissioners of Sewers, which you are to manage the best
you may, though you have a hard game to play, now that Mr.
Hedley hath spoyl'd it. One of the Nelthorpes was lately there
(it may be to stop the Commissioners' order, and to let the
mannor of Houden to another tenant). Let me know what he did,
but if it was he that gave out a report to the tenants that the
Bishop was fallen into the King's displeasure, by that false
suggestion and designe to make them hold off from renewing their
leases, truly neither he nor they shall fare the better for it,
and I merveyle you would give such an untrue report the hearing,
and not contradict it with all your confidence, or not tell who
it was that made this report to you, when you related it in your
letter to Mr. Arden. I thanke God, the King is most gracious to
me, and never more then now. When the Session of the Parliament
ends (which I trust wilbe within a fortnight) I will presently
begin my journey into the north, and there or by the way be glad
to see you, being
   Your assured freind,
   Joh. Duresme.
   For Mr. Miles Stapleton, at the halfe-moone in Houden upon
Humber, York=s=.
   Jo. Duresme, Franco.

<Q COS 1662 GSHELDON>
<A GILBERT SHELDON>
<G M>
<P II,97>
[} [\XL. - FROM BISHOP SHELDON TO BISHOP COSIN.\] }] 
   My very good Lord,
You have inabled me to stop the mouths of some great ones, who
cry out against your severity (it seems) without the least
cause. The recusants are in that like the presbyterians, who cry
out, "persequution, persequution," unles they may do and say
what they list. If you have done no more then what you write,
you could not doe lesse, and having those provocations in
Northumberland, 'twas much you did no more; and that clause in
your letter might well have beene spared wherin you say you
conceive that I put you in mind that no severity may be used
against persons of that religion, because I supposed there might
a severity be used not suitable to the lenity of his Majestie's
Goverment and the present conjunction. I hope you had not a
designe to put an ill gloss upon that which was ment well. If I
could beleeve so ill of
<P II,98>
you, I should spare my labour and leave what may concern you to
other intelligencers hereafter. But I will not trouble you
further then to let you know I have done you right, and doubt
not but upon the like occasion you would have done the like for
   Your Lordship's very humble
   Servant and Brother,
   Gilb: London.
   Octob. 28, 1662.
   For the Rt. Reverend Father in God the L=d=. Bp. of Durham at
Durham, pd. 3. these.

<Q COS 1662 GSHELDON>
<A GILBERT SHELDON>
<G M>
<P II,101>
[} [\XLIV. - FROM BISHOP SHELDON TO BISHOP COSIN.\] }] 
   My very good Lord,
I have received yours and am very sorry for your indisposition.
It could not have happen'd at a worse time, for the Church is
like to be in great danger the next Session; but your Lordship's
health must be taken care of, and therefore if without danger of
that you cannot be with us, thinke not of stirringe. But then
you must take care you send your proxy in a right forme (wherin
I cannot direct you) and I conceive you can leave it but to one.
I shall be full, so you must trust somebody else with it. I
will, when the time draws neer, aske you leave of the King to be
absent. We shall be reproached for the great store of mony we
have received. I would be glad to let them know what we have
given to the King and expended, if ther be occasion and therfore
I desire your Lordship to let me understand what it hath already
cost you about your houses &c., and what yet remaynes to be
done. This day the Council voted a Declaration to be published
of the Kinge's desire to give ease to tender consciences, both
Sectaryes and papists, as far as the parliament shall think fit.
This I am told, but we shall judg best of it when
<P II,102>
published; if it be no more I hope it will doe litle harme. I
have ever since the consecration of my Lord of Worcester been
much indisposed, and am but newly got out of my chamber with a
great cold upon me. As you want not mine, so afford your prayers
to,
   Your Lordships most affectionate friend and brother,
   Gilb. London.
   Decemb. the 26, 1662.

<Q COS 1662 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,102>
[} [\XLV. - FROM BISHOP COSIN TO MR. STAPYLTON.\] }] 
   Mr. Stapylton,
I had no sooner sealde up and sent away my last letter to you
(Jan: 30) but I received one from Sir Wm. Turner, which
satisfieth me in every thing els (and therefore is so farre a
(\supersedeas\) to you from speaking to him), save only that he
mentioneth nothing of the 145=l=. which Mr. Johnston sent us
word above a fortnight since he had conveyed to him for me by
bills of exchange. 158=l=. 10=s=. 2=d=. he will enter into his
booke as received from Mr. Poquelin for the plate sold at Paris,
which I am to accompt with my daughter for here, and pay her
asmuch.
   At the same time I had another letter from the Greek
Archbishop of Laodicea, to whom this inclosed is directed. When
you deliver it pay him 5=l=. his last Michaelmas pension, which
should then have bin delivered to him, and tell him he shall
have 5=l=. more at our next Lady Day in March; whereof you will
have care.
<P II,103>
   As you passe through Holborne aske of the painting glasier (I
have forgot his name and his signe) neere Hatton house, what he
will have for aneiling a coate of armes about a foote and half
in length, with the mantlins. Perhaps wee shall have a dozen or
20=tie=. or more of them to put in my chappel windows here. But
aske him his price as of yourself, and not from me, least his
price be so much the greater. You are long ere you say that the
present is delivered for W. [\? Winton\] house chappel. I have
received a letter from Mr. Young out of Houdenshire, who sayes
that the staiths are pretty well in repayre, 5 of them, and that
the rest shalbe looked into assoone as the time and weather
serve. He demands also wood for the tenants, who are to repayre
their banks, but I know of no wood due to them, or that I have
to grant, all being destroyed at Walkington and els where by the
purchasers and their agents. I woulde to God you coulde get me a
good and a sure receyvor, for this Dr. Broome tires me out who
am
   Your assured friend,
   Jo. Duresme.
   From my chamber in Aukland, Feb. 3, 1662.
   For Mr. Miles Stapylton, at Mr. Sanders's house in Coleman
streete, in London.

<Q COS 1662 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,103>
[} [\XLVI. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^JOHN COSIN TO MR.
STAPYLTON^]
   Mr. Stapylton,
I doe not mend so fast as you and others may imagine, for though
the swelling of my leggs be abated, yet the weaknes of them
continueth still, and the shortnes of my breath will not yet
leave me; therfore you might have spared your saying to Mr.
<P II,104>
Peacock, who was here with me yesterday, and sayd you assured
him that he should meete me upon the way betweene this and
London. It wilbe well if I can get out from hence at the
beginning, or within a weeke after the beginning of April, for I
am but now beginning to learne how I can goe a little abroad and
endure the coach, having ventured to creep in it to Durham, for
the setling of the Militia there, but returned very sore and
weary.
   J. Joplin hath entered good bond of 1000=l=. to the Sheriffe
here that he would render himself to the King's Bench (\corpus
cum causa`\) . The baliffe saith that he was bidden to returne
by Sergeant Maynard, and threatned if he kept him a prisoner any
longer. The returne of the writ you delay too long. I pray take
such care that I suffer not by it. If he be injoyned to come
back, and enter such bond as shall oblige him to live quietly
here, and shew himselfe a good subject to the King, it is all
the busines that I looke after; but I trust you will make good
your first word, that all shalbe done at his charges.
   The time now is neere when you are to looke for the rents due
from my Lord of Pemb[\roke\] , and my Lord of Salisbury. Take
50=l=. of Sir W=m=. Turner and deliver it to my cosin M=ris=.
Blakaby, that she may convey it to Norwich and Cambridge, as she
was wont to doe, and pray her to have the receipts thereof (or
acquittances) ready against I come, who am yo=rs=.
   Jo. Duresme.
   Bp. Auckland, March 20, 1662.
   I committed the care of Houdenshire to you, but D=r=. Broome
is yet in arreare about 300=l=.
   For Mr. Miles Stapylton, at Mr. Sanders's house in Coleman
streete, London.
   post frank.
   Jo. Duresme.

<Q COS 1665 RSTERNE>
<A RICHARD STERNE>
<G M>
<P II,109>
[} [\LIII. - FROM THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK TO BISHOP COSIN.\] }]
[^FROM RICHARD STERNE^]
   My Lord,
By the last post I received a letter from my Lord's Grace of
Canterbury, and therein copies of his Majestie's Letters to his
Grace, and Instructions concerning Hospitalls; both which I have
caused to be transcribed, and do send them to your Lordship
hereinclosed. The speeding whereof, and the returne thereupon to
be made from your Lordship to his Majesty by his Grace's
<P II,110>
hands I shall leave to your Lordship's care and prudence, and
take leave to rest,
   Your Lordship's very loving brother,
   Rich. Ebor.
   Bishopthorp, July 3, 1665.
   To the Right Reverend Father in God, John, Lord Bishop of
Durham, These d.d. att Duresme or Bishop's Auckland.
   p=t=. p=d=. For His Ma=ties=. service.

<Q COS 1665 RSTERNE>
<A RICHARD STERNE>
<G M>
<P II,130>
[} [\LX. - THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM
RICHARD STERNE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Right Reverend and my very good Lord,
His Majesty having taken care by Order of Councill and
Proclamation, for collections to be made throughout the whole
kingdome for the support of those persons and places that ly
under God's heavy visitation by the plague, and more especially
for the relief of the miserable condition of that great city of
London, upon which the great interests of trade and principall
strength of the nation depends, hath commanded me to recommend
those collections to all the Bishops of my Province. Accordingly
I do most earnestly desire your Lordship, and in his Majestie's
name require you, to employ your best care and diligence in
promoting what his Majesty hath so piously recommended both to
you and me, viz. to cause frequent collections to be made in all
parishes within your Diocese upon all occasions, and especially
upon the Fast-daies, and to see that the monies so collected be
duely and speedily brought in to you, according to the Order of
Councill, and His Majestie's Proclamation. And when you shall
have taken as much thereof as will serve to provide for the
present necessity of the visited places within your own Diocese,
(if any such be) that you forthwith send the overplus to the
Lord Bishop of London, or such person as he shall appoint to
receive the same, to be employed for the succour of the
miserably distressed in and about London and Westminster, whose
calamity is far more to be pityed then any elsewhere, not onely
for the rageing of the infection, but even for the very want of
necessaries for life, many perishing that way who els might have
been recovered out of the danger, and many thousands of poore
artisans being ready to starve for want of means to be employed
in their callings, all trading being become dangerous and layd
aside by reason of the spreading of the contagion. Of what you
shall do herein I shall desire from your Lordship a monethly
certificate, that I may by the same hand, by which I have
received His Majestie's commands, returne an accompt of yours
and mine own care and diligence in performance thereof. And so I
bid your Lordship heartily farewell and remaine,
   My Lord,
   Your lordship's very loving friend and brother,
   Rich: Ebor.
   Bishopthorp, Aug. 5, 1665.
   To the Right Reverend Father in God, John, Lord Bishop of
Durham, these.

<Q COS 1665 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,131>
[} [\LXI. - BISHOP COSIN TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.\] }] 
   Most Reverend and my very Honourable good Lord,
Divers moneths since I was directed by letters from your Grace
to my Lord Archbishop of York to give your Grace an account of
all the Hospitalls within my Diocess, according to his
Majestie's commands and instructions therewith sent unto me. But
by reason that some of the Masters of these Hospitalls were far
removed and absent from my Diocess, and others that were present
having been robbed of their Evidences and Records by the late
usurping times, it hath put me to a longer search before I could
be able to returne your Grace this my Answer, which I now do by
this Paper here inclosed, conteyning a full account of all the
Hospitalls in my Jurisdiction, and a cleare returne to all his
Majestie's comands concerning the severall conditions and state
of them, which your Grace may be pleased to represent unto his
Majesty and his most honourable Privy Councill, in the name of,
   My Lord,
   Your Grace's most humble and most obedient servant
   [\Jo. Duresme\] .
   Aug. 6.
   To the Archb=p=. of Cant.

<Q COS 1665 RSTERNE>
<A RICHARD STERNE>
<G M>
<P II,134>
[} [\LXII. - ARCHBISHOP STERNE TO BISHOP COSIN.\] }] 
   My Lord,
I am glad to heare of your Lordship's health, and that the
sickness doth not spread with you. Cawood was worse this last
week, than it hath been any week since it first began, July 21.
There have dyed in all about 45, whereof 13 this last week.
Nineteen houses at present shutt up, besides pest-houses in the
fields. But (God be thanked) no other town hath as yet received
any hurt by them. York also stands sound, though there are many
Londoners there. The Parliament (it is sayd) will sit at Oxford
Octob. 9. I shall desire (if possible) to be excused. I suppose
they will not sit long, and it is a long journey, dangerous
travelling, and I beleeve there will rather want roome than
company at Oxford. I presume you will, before this letter come
to you, have heard the good news from sea, which came hither
yesterday. The Dutch fleet being scattered by the late storms,
our Navy have light upon some of them. Four of ours have taken 4
of their men of warre, one of 40 gunnes, 2 of 50, and one of 54,
two of their East-Indy merchant-ships large and richly land [\?
laden\] , and burnt of their Smyrna ships. There are also 8
other merchant-ships taken, 14 in all, whereof account is
already given; and they hope to give a good accompt of the rest,
our ships being between them and home. I shall give my Lord of
Canterbury, or my Lord of London, or both, the
<P II,135>
contents of your Lordship's letter. His Highnes hath sent his
harbenger to Oxford to prepare his lodgings, intending (they
say) to remove thither against the Sitting of the Parliament.
This is all the newes I can think on at present. The rest is
mine own, and my wife's best services to your Lordship, resting,
   Your Lordship's very loving brother and servant,
   Rich: Ebor.
   Bishopthorp.
   Septemb. 9, 1665.
   To the right reverend father in God John, Lord Bishop of
Duresme, these.

<Q COS 1665 RSTERNE>
<A RICHARD STERNE>
<G M>
<P II,137>
[} [\LXIV. - ARCHBISHOP STERNE TO BISHOP COSIN.\] }] 
   My Lord,
Yesterday I received a letter from my Lord of Canterbury, who (I
hope) will get us remote Bishops excused from personall
appearance at the Parliament at Oxford, we sending our proxies.
I think it will be best to send our letters of proxie with
blanks, and with other letters to authorize some to put in what
names shall be thought fit, because I doubt there will hardly be
Bishops enow there to receive the proxies that will be sent. And
his Grace is of the same opinion, and wished me to remember him
kindly to you, and to signify so much. We grow worse at Cawood.
There have dyed in all above three score, whereof five on Friday
<P II,138>
last; new houses still breaking out, above 30 now shutt up. Of
nine score families in the town, six score take relief, and of
the other three score not many very well able to give relief.
York and some other great towns contribute very well, but the
lesser villages (I doubt) will be more troublesome to gather
then considerable when they are come in. Yet we have sent
already to London 50=li=. and hope to send 50=li=. more so soon
as we can get it returned. There was (God be thanked!) a good
abatement in this week's bill, but their necessities, as we
heare, are still very great, and relief will be very acceptable,
and the more acceptable the sooner it is sent. Mine and my
wife's services presented to your Lordship, desiring your
praiers, I rest
   Your Lordship's very loving brother and servant,
   Rich. Ebor.
   Bishopthorp,
   Sept. 18, 1665.
   I received your last moneths accompt and sent it to my Lord
of Canterbury.
   Tomorrow sennight (as is yet resolved) his Highness is to
take his journey for Oxford.

<Q COS 1665 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,142>
[} [\LXVII. - FROM BISHOP COSIN TO DEAN SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Durham Castle, Jan=ry=. 22, 1665.
   Mr. Deane of St. Paul's,
I am glad to heare by Mr. Davenport (to whom you use sometimes
to write) that you continue in good health during these
dangerous times of sicknes, and I should also be glad
otherwhiles to heare from you my selfe, for I have very often
written to you (that is, to the Deane and every one of the
prebendaries of this Church of Durham), and have not received
any answer to those my Letters under the hands of any one of you
all, and I think the reason is, because the reasons of my just
demands are so pregnant and strong, being asserted by other the
most experienced Bishops and learned lawyers that no good answer
can be agreed on or framed to them. In the mean while I have
spent all my fines upon the rebuilding of my Castles, which are
not yet finished,
<P II,143>
and for all other matters and heavy burthens lying upon me, I am
left to shift for my selfe, which truly I cannot do without
great difficulty and trouble of mind.
   The sicknes in these parts, thankes be to God, is well
abated, though it lurketh still in some of our quarters. For the
maintenance of those that have been and are still infected, wee
have been put to lay a sesse upon the countrey, so small were
the contributions of the severall parishes throughout all my
Diocess, but I have now good hope that upon the account made me,
both of those contributions and assessments, I shall be able to
spare 50=li=. to be sent unto my Lord of London towards the help
of those that are infected still in that city. I shall have the
account given me in this day, and if I find so much money
remaining, I will return it to his lordship by a bill of
exchange to Sir William Turner by the morrowe's post, so wishing
you all good health and hapines, I rest, Sir,
   Your very affectionate friend,
   Jo: Duresme.
   For M=r=. Deane of St. Paul's Church in London, These.

<Q COS 1666 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,148>
[} [\LXXI. - FROM THE SAME TO THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY AND
THE LORD CHANCELLOR.\] }] [^FROM JOHN COSIN^] 
   Most reverend and my honorable very good Lord,
I heare there are indeavours using to prevale with the King,
your Grace, and my Lord Chancellour, to interpose in an affaire
betweene my Lord the Earle of Pembrooke and my selfe, and
therefore think it fitting (to prevent all misapprehensions
which possibly may arise through wrong representations, where
one party only is heard) to give you a short account of the
whole business. In the yeere 1640 my Lord Pembrook's father,
being then Lord Chamberlaine, did, under pretence of the want of
a fitt house neare the Court, perswade my predecessour Bishop
Morton, a timorous person, to give his consent to the bringing a
Bill into the Parliament for the alienating Durham House in the
Strand for ever from the See, and setling of it on the Earle of
Pembrooke and heires under the fee farme rent of 200=l=. (\per
annum\) ; alleaging that the house was rather a charge to the
Bishops of Durham then a benefitt, and that the reserved rent
would be a great advantage: whereas in truth it was the quite
contrary, my predecessours having, besides the accommodation of
a house and stables for themselves and their families when they
were called up to give their attendance at the Court of
Parliament,
<P II,149>
used to make a considerable profit in letting part of the house
in lease. This bill being brought in found so great opposition
in the Parliament (notwithstanding the prevalency of the faction
at that time in both houses against the Church) that it could
not pass till a proviso was inserted that if the said yeerely
rent or 200=l=., or any part thereof, should happen to [{be{]
behind and unpaid by the space of six months after any of the
termes at which it ought to be paid, that then and from
thenceforth the said house should revert unto the Bishops of
Durham, as if that Act had never bin made: which clause I am
perswaded was on purpose inserted by the lovers of the Church,
in hopes that in better times the See might recover its just
rights, which at that time, the factions growing high, they
could not preserve. At the happy restoration of his Majestie my
Lord Pembrooke refused to pay the rent reserved by Act of
Parliament till I was forced to bring declarations of ejectment
against him, and then he beganne to thinke of taking up the
business, and in regard it was at the beginning of the King's
happy assuming of his just government and that the Earle was a
purchaser from the rebells, the satisfaction of whom was then
under deliberation, I was perswaded to decline the forfeiture,
and accept of the rent reserved, upon condition that for the
future the rent should be punctually paid unto me, without any
deduction for publick taxes and assessments; and on this manner
the business stood till Michaelmass last, at which time there
became halfe a yeere's rent due to me, which after some time
that by the good providence of Almighty God London's dreadfull
sickness was in a great measure abated, and the inhabitants
thereof, together with the King's Court, were most of them
returned to their houses, I sent one to demand at Bainard's
Castle, the place at which my Lord Pembrook's owne servants
desired to have it demanded, and then instead of receiving the
rent, or having civill entreaties of forbearance, those that
called for it could get nothing but downeright denyalls, my
Lord's servants saying that they had not received their rents
for the houses, and till they received them they would not pay
me my rents. These denyals continuing for six months after
Michaelmass, I gave order to my Attorney to make a legal demand
of the rent and the (\nomine poenae's\) , and proceed to
declarations of ejectment, according to the advantage the Act of
Parliament gave me, judging I could do no less without
prejudicing both my selfe and my successours, but my successours
much more then my selfe, my advantage in likelyhood being to be
but small, and of short continuance. And having now proceeded
thus farre upon these just and equitable grounds, I am tould
that my Lord the Earl of Pembrooke is using indeavours
<P II,150>
to your Grace to procure me to desert my advantage, or to get
the King to lay his commands upon me to do it; but as I trust
his Majestie will not be perswaded to it, so I am confident your
Grace is so great an asserter of the rights of the Church that
you will no way hinder, but, in what you may, further this See,
miserably impaired, first by the loss of Norhamshire and
Elinshire, since by the loss of this house, and now lately by
the loss of the Court of Wards. Besides, I verily believe, if
your Grace please to consider the thing, you will be in the same
mind with me, that the Act of Parliament hath determined my Lord
of Pembrook's title, and that, if I would, it is not in my power
to release the forfeiture so to him but that my successours may
recover it from him. And as I can neither ought to do any thing
in prejudice of my See and successours, so I hope neither the
King, your Grace, nor my Lord Chancellour, will require or
desire it of me; for there are many reasons why I and my
successours should have the benefit of this forfeiture, but not
any that I can comprehend why it should be pardoned to him, it
not coming upon him by any surprise, but by his owne and his
servants' willfull neglect and obstinacy, who very well knew the
penalty of the delay of paying their rents, and I cannot see any
reason why this default should be passed over in silence, or why
the title given by the Act of Parliament to the Bishop and his
successours in this See should bee neglected or waved, but that
the same reasons may at any time hereafter be brought why the
like default should also be remitted, and so his Lordship may at
any time delay the payment of the rent to me or my successours
as long as he pleaseth, without any hazard or loss to himselfe.
And I am sure it cannot be alleaged on his behalfe that he hath
disbursed any thing in the improvement of it, but hath by that
gained very large profit, for besides vast summs of money raised
by the sale of the lead, stones, timber, &c., he hath without
the expence of one penny in the buildings reserved to himselfe a
considerable annual rent above the 200=l=. payable by the Act of
Parliament to the See of Durham. And whilst he pleased to keepe
it as a dwelling house, for which purpose alone his father
pretended to take it, that he might be ready to give his
attendance at Court, he had a farre better pallace then Yorke
house at a less rent then my Lord the Duke of Buckingham was
pleased to set out therefore in lands, for which, besides the
rent, the Archbishops of Yorke receive fines as the tenants come
in and renew their leases. Whereby it will clearely appeare that
his
<P II,151>
Lordship will be no looser but a gainer by the house, though it
do revert to the See now. Whereas if [{it{] shall not revert, I
and my successours must of necessity be great loosers, as I have
already beene, by its passing from us, a much greater summe then
the rent reserved not being sufficient to provide a house and
stables fitt to receive our families when any occasion is given
us to come up to London, if our stay there be of any
continuance. And so begging your Grace's pardon that I have
given you the trouble of reading this narrative, which I should
not have don but for the interest of this much impaired
Bishoprick, I take leave and rest,
   Your Grace's most faithfull and humble servant,
   [\Jo. Duresme.\]

<Q COS 1666 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,153>
[} [\LXXIV. - BISHOP COSIN TO ARCHBISHOP SHELDON.\] }] 
   Aug. 27. 1666.
   Most Reverend and my very Honourable good Lord,
I received your Grace's letter of the 22=d= instant, wherein you
express your desires to see me at the next Session of
Parliament, and truely, my Lord, I would with all my heart that
I were able to come to it, but the severall infirmities of my
body grow so fast upon me, and have brought me to such a great
weaknes, that my physitians tell me if I do not abstain from
this journey now towards winter, and look the better to myselfe
in these two following moneths of September and October, I shall
hazard the safety of my life. Wherefore I beseech your Grace to
obtain for me, from the King and the House of Lords, leave of
absence for this time, and that I may make use of a proxy, which
I may send to my Lord of London for the giving of my vote upon
any occasion. And if it shall please God to give me strength and
health by the next spring, I purpose then not to faile of my
attendance, this Session so long continuing, or the Parliament
being called together againe. In the mean while, I may do the
King and the countrey more service here, in this great
conjuncture of affaires, by attending the cares of my
Lieutenancy, then I can do by coming to give my vote at the
Parliament. So praying for your Grace's health, upon whom we all
cheifly rely for the affaires of the Church, I take leave, and
rest,
   My good Lord
   Your Grace's most humble Servant,
   [\Jo. Duresme.\]

<Q COS 1666 ABYERLEY>
<A ANTHONY BYERLEY>
<G M>
<P II,155>
[} [\LXXVI. - FROM COLONEL BYERLY TO THE SAME.\] }] [^TO JOHN
COSIN^]
   My Lord,
I being at Goldsborough where I met with Sir Philip could not
but give you an accompt of what I heare from him and S=r=. John
Gothrich, which is, that the Citty of London is all on a fire.
It began on Saterday night last but not discoverd till Sonday
morning. The particulars I can not give you any certainty of,
but it is said to be as tirrible a fire as ever was heard of.
The King and the Queen lay two nights upon Thames, and it is
said durst not lodge in Whyte Hall. There are for certaine sixty
of the villaines that were active in the fyring are taken in the
very act, being French and English. The Duke of Bukingam haith
promised to send an expresse tonight or tomorrowe. If there be
any occasion for the Milicia to stir, you shall not fayle to
receive an accompt of it as soone as I knowe it, which wilbe as
soone as ever it comes to hand. In the meane time I am,
   Your most humble Servant
   Anth: Byerly.
   Goldsborough the 8=th=. of 7=br=. '66. Sat. night.
   For the right reverend father in God, John, Lord Bishop of
Durham, these.
   To be left with the post M=r=. of Darnton, to be sent with
speed. p=d=. 2=d=.

<Q COS 1666 JTEMPEST>
<A JOHN TEMPEST>
<G M>
<P II,155>
[} [\LXXVII. - FROM COLONEL TEMPEST TO THE SAME.\] }] [^TO JOHN
COSIN^]
   September the 9=th=. 1666.
   Right honourable,
Having received your Lordshipp's yesternight, as I was going to
bed, I did imediately put on my cloaths, and went to Durham, to
confer with the Officers of the troope now quartred theare.
<P II,156>
I did acquaint them that theare was some reason for apprehension
of dainger from unquiett spiritts in this juncture, and tharfore
desired them both to double their guard, and to keepe their
petroles constant in the night, that we might not be surprised
nor taken unprovided. I did likewise give command to our own
officers to provide themselves, and the souldiers here about the
towne, that they might be ready upon the beating of the drum, if
thear should be occasion, which I thought was all that was
necessary to be done upon this occasion. But alass! to-day hath
produced such lamentable and sad newes, that it putts us all to
our witt's end, not knowing what to say or doe, but we do not at
present apprehend any thing of dainger within ourselves which
should occasion the drawing together all the militia, and since
we have a troope here who keepe a constant guard, and a company
of foot at Hartlepoole, I doe not see what necessity theare will
be to draw any together at present. I should think it more
convenient to reserve our duty till these forces be drawne from
us, or that we receive a command from above, which we have
alwaies heretofore had upon the like occasion. I beleive the
rumor of the Lord Falconberge his drawing his men together, hath
risen from the muster of his regiment, which was appointed to be
this weeke, more then 6 dayes since, and meeting with this
lamentable flame, and the fayler of the post, hath caused it to
be otherwaies represented to your Lordshipp, but I shall
allwaies obay your Lordshipp's commands when I receive them. I
have transcribed a letter from my Lord Craven's steward, which
will give your Lordshipp an account of what I suppose you have
receivd from other hands. I am in very great haste, and beg your
Lordshipp's pardon for all (\errata\) .
   Your Lordshipp's humble servant,
   John Tempest.

<Q COS 1666 RSTERNE>
<A RICHARD STERNE>
<G M>
<P II,157>
[} [\LXXVIII. - FROM THE ARCHBISHOP OF YORK TO THE SAME.\] }]
[^FROM RICHARD STERNE TO JOHN COSIN^]
   My Lord,
I send your Lordship hereinclosed a copy of an Order made by his
Majestie, with the advice of his honourable Privy Counsell, and
directed to me, concerning the moneys collected upon the late
fast for the City of London; to which I refer your Lordship for
your directions in the execution thereof. I onely intreat your
Lordship will be pleased to certify me of what you shall do
herein, that I may accordingly give an accompt here when I shall
be required. I shall be glad to heare of your Lordship's good
health upon this and every other occasion. We have litle newes
here, onely the last night, about 8 of the clock, the stables of
the Horseguard neare Whitehall were (by the carelesnes of a man
carrying an arme-full of straw with a candle in his hand) set on
fire, and burnt down, to the value of 1000=li=. But, God be
thanked, there was such good help, and such care taken, that it
went no further. My best love and service tendred to your
Lordship, I rest
   Your very loving brother and servant,
   Rich. Ebor.
   At D=r=. Jones' his house in the litle cloysters,
Westminster, Novemb. 10. 1666.
   To the Right Reverend Father in God, John, Lord Bishop of
Durham at his Palace there, or at Bishop's Aukeland, these dd.

<Q COS 1666 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,163>
[} [\LXXXIII. - FROM BISHOP COSIN TO THE LORD MAYOR OF LONDON.\]
}] [^TO WILLIAM BOLTON^]
   Durham Castle. Decemb. 14. 1666.
   My Lord,
According to his Majestie's Proclamation and an Order made by
his Most Honourable Privy Councill upon the 7=th=. of November
last, concerning the collection made in my Diocess for the
releif of those distressed persons who were undone by the late
dismall
<P II,164>
fire in London and the sending of the money soe collected to
your Lordship, I have here inclosed a Bill of Exchange for
200=l=. to be paid into your Lordship's hands, and to be
disposed of by you according to his Majestie's Order and
Proclamation. The Mayor of Newcastle certifies me that he hath
paid you in 100=l=. already. The Mayor and Vicar of Barwick send
me word they have paid your Lordship 48=l=. And M=r=. Pye,
Rector of Morpeth, hath (as he writes) taken order to pay you
27=li=. All which summes of money, coming to 375=li=., I shalbe
glad to understand from your Lordship that you have safely
received, and when any more shall come in, for there are some
parishes yet behind, I shall not faile to transmitt the same
unto you, whom I commit to the blessed protection of Almighty
God, and rest, 
   My Lord,
   Your Lordship's very humble servant,
   Jo. Duresme.

<Q COS 1666 WBOLTON>
<A WILLIAM BOLTON>
<G M>
<P II,166>
[} [\LXXXVI. - FROM THE LORD MAYOR OF LONDON TO BISHOP COSIN.\]
}] [^FROM WILLIAM BOLTON TO JOHN COSIN^]
   Gresham Colledge, London, Febru: 5=th=. 1666.
   My Lord,
This in answer to two of yours, the former dated the 14=th= day
of December last, the second of a later date, sending your
Lordshipp the thanks due for your pious care in speeding up the
charitable benevolence within your Diocesse. I have inclosed an
accompt, and desire your Lordshipp to add this trouble to the
rest in letting me know how and where to meet with Mr. Ralph
Johnson who is to pay the two bills of exchange within this
accompt mentioned, that so there may be no default made in
looking after them. Wee are all deeply sufferers in the calamity
of this famous citty, and have just reason to be thankfull for
your Lordshipp's care and charity; the continuance whereof is
prayed by,
   Your Lordship's humble servant,
   Wm. Bolton, Major.
   For the right Reverend Father in God, John, Lord Bishopp of
Durham. These, at Durham Castle.

<Q COS 1668 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,201>
[} [\XCVII. - FROM THE SAME TO MILES STAPYLTON, ESQ.\] }] [^FROM
JOHN COSIN^]
   Jan=ry=. 23, 1668
   Mr. Stapylton,
Being yesternight at Whitehall with the Commissioners of the
Treasury, about the stipend belonging to Bishop Langley's
Schoole, which what end it will have I cannot yet tell.
   I pray let me know of you if you have found any thing
materiall concerning Bishop Langley's foundation. The Deane here
urgeth that it ought not to be called Bishop Langley's
foundation, but the foundation of two priests, that set up a
Chanterie in the Cathedrall Church for two men to say masse and
teach boys gratis, having six marks or 40=s=. a-yeare allowed
them for their masses, and, upon the dissolution of chanteries,
the two pretended schooles were Edward's foundation, and that
ever since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth the Deane and
Chapter's
<P II,202>
schoolemaster hath received halfe the stipend which belongeth to
one of these schooles paid him from yeare to yeare by the
Auditor.
   But first I answered that Bishop Langley, in his Letters
patents, dated the 14=th=. of June 1414, cals it (\nostram
fundationem et ordinationem\) , as you may see in the Chartuary,
whereof M=r=. Bullock the Register subscribed me a copy. And
2=ly=. I answered that the Statute 1 Edw. 6. c. 14. did by a
Proviso not newly found, but continue on and save the Schooles
from being dissolved which were founded before. 3=ly=. I
answered that at this time, during the reigne of King Edward 6,
the Deane and Chapter's Schoolemaster was not in being, nor
their schoole neither, which was afterwards set up in 2=o=.
Marie, and annuall allowances made to it in salary, diet, and
livery, out of the common revenues of the Church. 4=ly=. I told
them (and I thinke I said true) that if their Schoolemaster had
halfe of the pension belonging to the other schooles, it was
because the Bishop of Durham had given his consent, and letters
of collation thereunto, for so it is provided in Bishop
Langley's foundation that if either of the schoolemasters there
be not instituted and collated by Letters under the Bishop's
seale, and especially sworne both to give obedience unto him,
and personally to reside in the houses appointed for them, they
should have no stipend at all. 5=ly=. I answered that the 6
markes (\per annum\) aunciently allotted to them (which M=r=.
Deane would have the two 40=s=. which you pay out of the Roll)
was the stipend allotted for the two Chanterie priests to say
masse and teach schoole, so that halfe the six markes at least,
issuing out of divers freeholds in the Bishoprick, will of right
belong to the Schooles, and that the same stipend of six markes
did probably receive a great augmentation by the bounty of the
Founder and others, before King Edward 6=th='s time, for so it
provided in Bishop Langley's foundation, where the two priests
and teachers of youth are made a body corporate, to receive new
lands and revenues, and to plead for them against any man that
should oppose to pay them. 6=ly=. I pleaded that this
augmentation of 40=s=. and 40=s=. (\per annum\) was the Bishop
of Durham's voluntary and free gift, among the annuities allowed
in his Roll to the High Sheriff and others. 7=ly=. I said that
the Auditor must know the persons to whom hee is to pay their
several stipends of 8=s=. (\per annum\) out of the mannor of
Kaverdby in Lancashire, and that he hath no other means to know
who those persons are but by their producing and shewing to him
the Bishop's Letters of nomination and collation to their
places. And lastly, that, since I was Bishop, the present
Schoolemaster could shew no such letters from the
<P II,203>
Bishop, nor perhaps any settlement in his place from the Deane
and Chapter.
   I remember, when I was Prebend there, a great stir and
question was made by the Organist of the Church about halfe
Bishop Langley's Song Schoole stipend, and that one Rangall, a
singing man in the Quire, had a contention with him in the
Chancery about it, before Judge Hutton, as I was then told. If
there be any such matter you may find it in the Examiner's
Office, or some other office there. And if my memory be good, I
thinke you told me that the Coroner or Collector of my rents at
Durham accounted to my Auditor 15=d=., or such a matter, for the
ground whereupon the ruin'd houses or schooles upon the Place
Greene stood, besides a free rent paid for the Archdeacon's
house next adjoining, and some others. Let me know what rents
these are, and for what places. For the Deane was positive that
the Archdeacon's house upon the Place Greene paid a yearly rent
to their Receivor, and that therefore they have an interest in
the Palace Greene, as well as the Bishop, saying further that
hee never knew any other Grammar Schoole kept in Durham but by
their Schoolemaster alone, who was only able to teach the boys
Latine and Greeke, according to the words, as hee said, (but hee
was mistaken in it, as I said) of that which wee call Bishop
Langley's foundation and ordinance. If you can recover the
Schoolmasters' names that were in King Edward the 6=th='s time,
or at the beginning of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, out of
the old Treasurers' books belonging to that time, wee may have
some further lyght by them, and either M=r=. Bullock, or M=r=.
Hedley, or Robert King, can direct you to get the sight of them,
if any such be still extant and remaining since the last rapine
of the plunderers; from which God deliver us all hereafter.
   Concerning the Schooles, besides what I said before, I added,
that it would be a very hard thing for the Deane and Chapter to
endeavour to take away M=r=. Nicholl's stipend, who was a
diligent painfull man, and one of their own body, collated by me
to it, and taking paines in his place; all which was in effect
to rob Peter and pay Paul, thereby to save so much money out of
their own purses. And that it would be as hard if the Bishop
should be defeated of his own right (which in all things hee is
sworne to preserve) in bestowing that place by collation, which
I'm sure the
<P II,204>
Deane's Schoolmaster hath not, and without which I know not how
the Auditor would pay any man the stipend. I pray search my
Register's office for any of my predecessors' grants of those
places belonging to Bishop Langley's Schooles. Bishop Morton
bestowed one of the places upon Samuel Martin, and, as I thinke,
under his instrument and seale. See what this is, and let me
know what else you can find about it, either in my Registry, or
in my Books of Patents. If nothing will do, it must go to law.
   After all this, against M=r=. Deane's allegation that the
halfe stipend hath been alwaies paid to his Schoole master
(which is yet uncertaine) I have this argument, which they call
(\argumentum ad hominem\) , to urge, that if (\de facto\) it
hath beene so paid for (\dato et non concesso\) , yet (\de
jure\) it ought not to have been paid, as M=r=. Deane himselfe
and the Prebendaries said in another case concerning themselves.
For when their subsidies due to the King were not long since
demanded of them by my sub-collectors, who urged this argument
that subsidies had beene alwaies paid by the Deane and Chapter's
predecessors, their answer was, that they regarded not what had
been so paid and done (\de facto\) , but what ought to have
beene done (\de jure\) ; and that no law could urge them to pay
any subsidies, which though I grant not nor beleeve, yet they of
all others should not urge an argument of custome in one case
when they deny it in another. But that this stipend was ever
paid to their Schoolemaster without the Bishop's licence and
grant they can never proove, which I am the rather induced to
believe that some such grant was made to them, or to some of
them, because they say that M=r=. Smart, M=r=. Inglethorp, M=r=.
Walton, M=r=. Smelt, had that house wherein M=r=. Martin now
dwells, either to inhabit there or to take the rent of it by
letting it out yearly, which they would no waies do unles the
Bishop had collated it upon them, and because Bishop Langley's
foundation requires both the Schoole-masters there to reside
personally in those houses, and to take an oath for that
purpose, (^as Vicars use to do, to reside upon their
Vicaridges^) . M=r=. Samuel Martin and M=r=. Elias Smith can
tell you of this particular matter of the houses before they
were ruin'd in their times. (\Et super totam materiam\) let me
heare from you.
<P II,205>
   All this is to your selfe, till we see farther what will be
done in it, for the most of the Commissioners promise me a
warrant dormant for the yearly payment of those two
Schoolemasters, who had my letters of collation, yet now upon
M=r=. Deane's opposition, and at his instance, they have taken
some time to consider of it, wherein I hope they will follow the
rules of honour and justice.
   In the Auditor's yearly account book for the payment of the
16=li=. 13=s=. 4=d=. spetiall reference is had, and mention
made, of Bishop Langley's foundation, so that I know not how
they can transferre it to any other.
   [\Jo. Duresme.\]

<Q COS 1669 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,206>
[} [\XCIX. - FROM THE SAME TO THE MAYOR AND CORPORATION OF
NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE.\] }] [^FROM JOHN COSIN^]
   Mr. Major and the rest of the Corporation of Newcastle,
Publick peace being the life of the Kingdome, and execution the
life of the laws, it hath been my endeavour to procure and
<P II,207>
preserve both, as in my Diocese in generall, so in your
Corporation in particular, (being one of the most considerable
townes under my episcopall charge) witnesse my frequent letters
to you in order to those good endes. I should have been right
glad to have seene, and would as gladly to your advantage have
reported the good effects, as I am heartily sorry to heare still
the contrary; which cannot be otherwise as long as the
ringleaders of the factions are suffered to walke at liberty, so
expresly contrary to the Act 17 Carol. II., which lyes before
you, to which the King's late Proclamation ought to have given
fresh vigour. I would faine vindicate the Towne of Newcastle
from the foule imputation of being the nursery of faction in
these northern parts, which, as things now stand, I cannot do;
but rather must, and, according to my duty, will report the
contrary to the King and his Counsell, and then any one may
easily foresee the evill consequences. Out of my speciall
respect to the Towne and Corporation I forbeare still, in
expectation of a speedy account that both the Act of Parliament
and the King's Proclamation in this behalfe are really obeyed,
that is, duly executed. If, as I heare, any of the Seducers
pretend they have subscribed, and taken the oath required by the
Act 17 Car. II., I desire you would speedily send me their
Certificates. Meanwhile, in hope that you will make good use of
this, my last warning, tendered unto you out of my tender care
for the welfare of your Towne, I commend you all to the Grace of
God, and remaine, Gentlemen,
   Your loving Pastour and servant,
   Jo: Duresme.
   From my Castle at Duresme, this 6=th=. of Aug: 1669.

<Q COS 1669 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,207>
[} [\C. - FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^FROM JOHN COSIN TO
THE MAYOR AND CORPORATION OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE^]
   Mr. Major, &c.
Seeing that the Chapplery of St. Andrew's in the Towne of
Newcastle is now vacant by the death of M=r=. Ashburnham, the
<P II,208>
late Curate there, therefore, out of my pastorall care for that
place, I do recommend to you, and to the rest of your
Corporation, M=r=. Robert Bonner, to supply that Cure: the
rather because borne in your Towne, and formerly officiating in
that Chapplery, and consequently supposed to be both more
acceptable, and also profitable among you; and the more, because
unblameable both in life and doctrine. For the publique good of
you all I shall not be unwilling to dispense with his residence
at Hartbourne, being assured that he will provide a sufficient
Curate and preacher there, to whom he will give a good and
competent stipend for that purpose. I doubt not of your
acceptance of this my motion in order to his admission at St.
Andrew's by my Episcopall authority. And whereas I was lately
informed that M=r=. Bonner had declined this place at St.
Andrew's, I have now, since that time, certainly understood that
he is not only willing but desirous to attend that Cure, and
with all diligence to bestow his care and paines upon it; which
desire of his being seconded by the other Ministers of your
Towne, I hope you will the better regard it. Thus commending you
to God's protection, I remaine, Gentlemen,
   Your loving Pastour and servant,
   [\Jo. Duresme.\]
   Duresme, Aug: 12, 1669.

<Q COS 1661 JCOSIN>
<A JOHN COSIN>
<G M>
<P II,311>
[} [\III. - FROM MR. COSIN TO MR. SANCROFT.\] }] 
   Durham Castle, Aug, 26. 1661.
   Sir,
I should not, I perceive, appeare in my owne colours, that is,
(^soe good a freind^) , as you thinke competent to revive the
memory of an absent freind, if I should excuse my long silence.
Yet if I could
<P II,312>
bespeake that powerfull intercession which I formerly desired, I
should not be averse from it, maugre your arguments. For suppose
that I did not so wisely in troubleing Archimedes to take up a
pinne, yet whilst I rely upon the curtesy of such a freind,
(\dulce erit vel desipere\) . Sir, I take the greatest content
in the world that you speake to me in your letter so like a
freind, and my Lord did professe publikely the content he took
himselfe at the receipt of your present to him. I assure you the
affectionate expressions he has used in your behalfe will
appeare (\ad extra\) , if I may so speake, to have been most
reall, and (\ostensio amoris exhibitio est operis\) . You tould
me you was become a water drinker. I hope that by this time the
recovery of your health has proved the first verse of Pindar to
be true. But oh! that I had been at Westminster that Sunday on
which my freind preach't there! [^LATIN OMITTED^] For the rest,
let freindship, holy freindship, live: and let the loveliest of
all the freinds in the world live and flourish; and be our
freind for ever. I would (and I think by so doeing I should)
returne your civility of sending me one inclosed in yours, by
re-sending one inclosed in yours, if I thought that either our
freind or your selfe were in London, but if you chance both to
be there, I doe still persist in bespeakein a powerfull
intercession to excuse mee, but that is none but your owne: and
to none but (^soe good freind^) , and for none but
   Sir,
   Your most affectionate servant,
   John Cosin.
   You have 1000 salutations from hence.
   To my ever honored freind M=r=. William Sandcroft These
p=snt=.
   Leave this w=th=. M=r=. Robert Beaumont, at the Starre in
little Brittaine, London.

<Q COS 1660S? MSTAPYLTON>
<A MILES STAPYLTON>
<G M>
<P II,385>
[} [\XVIII. - FROM MILES STAPYLTON, ESQ., TO JAMES MICKLETON,
ESQ.\] }] 
   Sir,
I am very sorry to understand from you that I shall want the
satisfaction of your company this day at Christopher Bell's; but
more sorry for the occasion, your want of health. I am fully
perswaded that the North and South Bailys are no part nor
parcell of the City of Durham, and my reasons are these
following: - 1=st=. The scituation of the Castle, which stands
at the head of the City, and by it, and a wall adjoyning to it
strikes quite through from one side of the City wall to an
other, in such a manner that if you could continue the City any
further then the Castle gates, to make the communication further
you must pass through the Castle gates; for, in truth, those
gates which we commonly call the Gaole gates are the Castle
gates, the Gaole being part of the Castle, to wit, the
outwardmost part, and the office of Gaolor is, and alwayes hath
bin, by the most antient patents upon record, stiled (\officium
Janitoris Castri nostri exterioris\) , and it is not probable
that a Castle being built for a place of defence
<P II,386>
for the preservation of St. Cuthbert's shrine: for by ancient
histories it appeares that was the intention of building it at
first, conteining such a compass of ground as would conteine a
competent number of households for the defence of the Castle,
which hold by Castle gard to come in time of danger to defend
the Castle, as by ancient records doth appeare, should suffer
such a communication as would much weaken the defence of it, as
it must needs do if the City extended through the Castle, for
then it would be necessary for the government of the City that
the chiefe Governor thereof should at all times have libertie as
well in one part of the City as in an other; and indeed I thinke
if one part of the citizens were tyed to the defence of the
Castle all the rest should be so too, which it is cleare they're
not. 2=dly=. The distinct jurisdiction. The City of Durham being
a Mannor, and having view of Frank pledge within one circuit of
ground, and the Castle being an other Mannor, and having view of
Frank pledge in an other circuit, and, I believe, it was never
heard that one and the same City should have two distinct
jurisdictions, which, in truth, is a contradiction (\in
adjecto\) ; for a City implies a body politick, but two distinct
jurisdictions by her several chiefe Governors (as the Constable
of the Castle, and the chiefe Magistrate of the City, whether he
be called Mayor, Alderman, or Bailiff, or by any other title
whatsoever) would imply, if not two body politicks, yet surely
one, and somewhat more, and would make a moral monster. And this
reason is confirmed to me by the constant practice and the words
of the Charter, which doth comprehend the whole City to be
within the Corporation; but in practice the chiefe Magistrate
hath never exercised any jurisdiction within the two Bailiffs,
more then they have in the Elvets and Crossgate; and therefore I
conclude the first to be no more parcell of the City then the
latter.
   I am, Sir, your very affectionate servant,
   Miles Stapylton.
   My service to your good lady.
   For my esteemed friend, James Mickleton Esq.



<B HARLEY>

[^LETTERS OF THE LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY, WIFE OF SIR ROBERT
HARLEY, OF BRAMPTON BRYAN, KNIGHT OF THE BATH. ED. BY LEWIS,
THOMAS TAYLOR. CAMDEN FIRST SERIES 58. 1854.^]

<Q HAR 1625 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 1>
[} [\I.\] }] 
[}TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBART HARLEY, KINGHT OF THE BATHE.}]
   S=r= - Docter Barker has put my sister into a cours of
ientell fisek, which I hope by God's bllsing will doo her much
good. My sister giues you thankes for seending him to her. I
pray you remember that I recken the days you are away; and I
hope you are nowe well at Heariford, wheare it may be, this
letter will put you in minde of me, and let you knowe, all your
frinds heare are well; and all the nwes I can seend you is, that
my Lo. Brooke is nowe at Beaethams Court. My hope is to see you
heare this day senet, or to-morrowe senet, and I pray God giue
vs a happy meeting, and presarfe you safe; which will be the
great comfort of
   Your most true affectionat wife, Brilliana Harley.
(^Ragly: the 30 of Sep. 1625.^)

<Q HAR 1625 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 1>
[} [\II.\] }]
[}TO MY DEARE HOUSBAND S=R= ROBART HARLEY, KNIGHT, IN
BLACKFRIERS, AT MY LO. LEWSONS HOWES.}]
   Deare S=r= - I thanke you for your letter which you sent me
from Tuddington: which gaue me satisfaction of your being well,
so fare on your journey: which ascurance of your health is the
beest nwes
<P 2>
I can heare, except that of your comeing home. I ernestly desire
to heare howe you came to Loundon; and doo thinke your men stay
longe: but I hope they will bringe me good nwes of you, and then
I shall be well pleased. Ned, I thanke God, is very well, and
you will beleeve me, if I say he looses non of his grandfather
loue, whoo is better than you leeft him. And no more to you at
this time; but I beceache the Allmighty presarue you, and giue
you happy meeting with
   Your most faithfull affectionat wife, Brilliana Harley.
(^Brompton, the 10th of Phe. 1625.^)

<Q HAR 1625 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 2>
[} [\III.\] }]
[}TO MY DEARE HOUSBAND S=R= ROBART HARLEY, KNIGHT.}]
   S=r= - I thanke you for sending me word, I may hope to see
you at Easter, which time will be much longed for by me. I hope
the parlament has spent as much time as will satisfy them in
dooing nothing: so that nowe some good frute of theare meeting
will be brought to ripnes, which is the effect of our prayers.
This day I deleverd the +L100 to my father: which he has payed
to Mr. Davis: that mony that was wanting of it, was made vp with
the +L50 pounde Mr. Lacy payed for wood. The payling of the nwe
parke is made an end of. Yesterday your company only was at
Heariford, to shewe what they had lerned, whear Sr. Jhon
Skidemore and Mr. Vahan weare judges; and so they meane to be of
the reest of the companis, and they haue apointed teen of your
company to learne the vse of theiare armes and so to teache the
reest. This last night I not being very well, made me seend this
day for the midwife, which I thinke I should haue defered to
longe. I asure myself I haue your prayers, becaus you haue so
great a part of mine: and I blls God that you injoy your health,
which I beeg of you to take care of. I thanke God, Ned is well,
and I beeg your bllsing for him: and I pray God preserue you
well and giue you a happy and speedy meeting with 
   Your most faithful affectionat wife, Brilliana Harley.
<P 3>
   I pray you present my humbell duty to my father, and my lady.
   My cosen Thomkins remembers her loue to you.
(^Brompton, the 17 of Mar. 1625.^)

<Q HAR 1627 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 3>
[} [\IV.\] }]
[}TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY.}]
   Deare S=r= - Your two leters, on from Hearifort and the other
from Gloster, weare uery wellcome to me: and if you knwe howe
gladly I reseaue your leters, I beleeue you would neeuer let any
opertunity pase. I hope your cloche did you saruis betwne
Gloster and my brother Brays, for with vs it was a very rainy
day, but this day has bine very dry and warme, and so I hope it
was with you; and to-morowe I hope you will be well at your
journis end, wheare I wisch my self to bide you wellcome home.
You see howe my thoughts goo with you: and as you haue many of
mine, so let me haue some of yours. Beleeue me, I thinke I neuer
miste you more then nowe I doo, or ells I haue forgoot what is
past. I thanke God, Ned and Robin are well; and Ned askes every
day wheare you are, and he says you will come to-morowe. My
father is well, but goos not abrode, becaus of his fiseke. I
haue sent you vp a litell hamper, in which is the box with the
ryteings and boouckes you bide me send vp, with the other
things, sowed up in a clothe, in the botome of the hamper. I
haue sent you a partriche pye, which has the two pea chikeins in
it, and a litell runlet of meathe, that which I toold you I made
for my father. I thinke within this muthe, it will be very good
drinke. I sende it vp nowe becaus I thinke carage when it is
ready to drincke dous it hurt; thearefore, and please you to let
it rest and then taste it; if it be good, I pray you let my
father haue it, because he spake to me for such meathe. I will
nowe bide you god night, for it is past a leauen a cloke. I pray
God presarue you and giue you good sugsess in all your biusnes,
and a speady and happy meeting. 
   Your most faithfull affectinat wife, Brilliana Harley.
<P 4>
   I must beeg your bllsing for Ned and Rob. and present you
with Neds humbell duty.
(^Bromton, the 5 of October, 1627.^)

<Q HAR 1628? BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 4>
[} [\V.\] }]
[}TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY, KNIGHT.}]
   My deare S=r= - I ame glad of this opertuenity to present you
with the remembranc of my deare loue. I hope you came well to
Bristo; and I much longe to heare from you, but more a thousand
times to see you, which I presume you will not beleeue, becaus
you cannot poscibilly measure my loue. I thanke God your father
is well, and so are your three soons. Ned presents his humbell
duty to you, and I beeg you bllsing for them all; and I pray God
giue you a happy and speady meeting with 
   Your most affectinat wife, Brill. Harley.
   If I thought it would hasten your comeing home, I would
intreat you to doo soo.
   I pray you remember me to Mr. Pirson. I thanke God all at his
howes are well.
(^Bromton, the 7th, 1628.^)

<Q HAR 1629 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 4>
[} [\VI.\] }]
[}TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY, KNIGHT.}]
   My deare S=r= - I thanke you for your letter, which I
reseaued this weake by the carrier, and I thanke God for my
father's health. I trust in our good God, in his owne good time,
he will giue a happy end to your biusness. I haue rwitten a
letter to my father, which I send you heare inclosed. If you
thinke it will not displeas him, and it may any thinge at all
seet forward your biusnes, I pray you deleuer it to him. If you
do deleuer it to my father, I pray you seale it first. Allas! my
deare S=r=, I knowe you doo not to the on halfe of my desires,
desire to see me, that loues you more then any earthly thinge. I
should be glad if you would but rwite me
<P 5>
word, when I should hope to see you. Need has bine euer sence
Sunday trubled with the rume in his fase very much. [\...\] The
swelling of his face made him very dull; but nowe, I thanke God,
he is better, and begins to be merry. He inquires for Jhon Walls
comeing downe: for he thinkes he will bringe him a letter. I
must desire you to send me downe a littell Bibell for him. He
would not let me be in peace, tell I promised him to send for
on. He begings nowe to delight in reading: and that is the booke
I would haue him place his delight in. Tom has still a greate
coold; but he is not, I thanke God, sike with it. Brill and
Robin, I thanke God, are well; and Brill has two teethe. Ned
presents his humble duty to you, and I beeg your bllsing for
them all: and I beceach the Allmighty to prosper you in all you
doo, and to giue you a happy meeting with
   Your most faithfull affectinat wife, Brilliana Harley.
   I pray you, S=r=, send downe no silke grogram. I hope you
haue reseuefed the siluer candell-stike.
   Your father, I thanke God, is much better than he was. I pray
you, S=r=, present my beest loue to my sister Wacke.
(^Desem 4, 1629.^)

<Q HAR 1630 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 5>
[} [\VII.\] }]
[}TO MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY, KNIGHT, AT HIS HOWES
IN ALLDERMANBERY.}]
   My dearest S=r= - Your men came to Bromton on thursday last.
I thanke God that you haue your halth. I hope the Lord will giue
vs bothe faith to waite vpon him; and I trust that in his mercy
he will give a good end to your biusnes. It pleases God that I
continue ill with my coold, but it is, as they say, a nwe
disceas: it trubelles me much, more becaus of my being with
childe; but I hope the Lord will deale in mercy with me; and,
deare S=r=, let me haue your prayers, for I haue need of them.
Docter Barker is nowe with me. I thanke God the childeren are
all well, and Need and Robine are very glad of theire boose, and
Ned is much discontended that you come not downe. I beeg your
bllssing for
<P 6>
them all, beceaching the Allmighty to presarue you, and to giue
you a joyefull and happy meeting with your 
   Most faithfull affectinat wife, Bril. Harley. 
   I pray present my humbell duty to my father. This day theare
came a man from Ragley to feetche my cosen Hunkes to her mother,
whoo is very sike.
(^Bromton, the 8 of May, 1630.^)

<Q HAR 1633 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 6>
[} [\VIII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE HUSBAND S=R= ROBERT HARLEY, KNIGHT.}]
   My deare S=r= - I pray you reseaue my thankes for your letter
by my cosen Pris, and by the carrier; they weare both very
wellcome to me, which I thinke you beleeue, for in part you know
howe deare you are to me. I ame very glad that my brother Raphe
is come to Loundoun; I hope he is nowe well. I pray you to giue
him counsell what to doo. I desire from my hoole hart that he
may grow in the feare of God, and then he will be happy. Pinner
shall send some woole to Lemster. I haue heare inclosed sent you
the aquittance of the pursevant, by which you may knowe his
name. I doo blles my good God, that you haue had so a good an
end about the presentation of Bromton. I thinke you haue doun a
very good worke, in recommending Mary Wood to my Lady Veere, to
home I hope shee will doo acceptabele sarvis. I am toold of a
gentellwoman by Docter Barker. She was bread with my old Lady
Manering. She, they say, is religious and discreet, and very
hamsome in dooing of any thinge; her name is Buckle, a
Sharpsheare woman: if you like of it, I would thinke of haueing
of her; for I haue no body aboute me, of any judgment, to doo
any thinge. My heate continueing, I sent to Docter Barker to
come and see me let bloud; he came on thursday night, and
yesterday morning I sent fore a curgen at Bischops Castell, that
let Mrs. Wallcot blud, and he pricke my arme twis, but it would
not blled; and I would not try the third time. I hope the Lord
will derect me what to doo: and for gooing abrode I will endeuor
to doo it as soune as it shall pleas
<P 7>
God to inabell me. It is a word of comfort which you rwit me,
that you hope shortly to send for your horsess. I beceache the
Lord to giue you a good and happy end to all your biusness. I
thanke God all the chillderen are well, and so is Ned Smith. Ned
and his brother present theaire humbell dutis to you; and I begg
your bllesing for them all, and your loue and prayers for my
self. I beceach the Lord to giue you a speady and happy meeting
with
   Your most affectinat wife for ever, Brilliana Harley.
   Mr. Littell, I thanke God, is well, and abell to goo a
littell abrode.
   I thanke you for my very fine wascott: by this carrier is
sent vp the clocke and dublet and houses you sent for.
(^May the 18, 1633.^)

<Q HAR 1638 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 7>
[} [\IX.\] }] 
[}TO MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Good Need - I hope thease lines will finde you well at
Oxford. I longe to reseaue the ashurance of your comeing well to
your iournyes end. We haue had faire weather sence you went, and
I hope it was so with you, which made it more pleaseing to me.
You are now in a place of more varietyes then when you weare at
home; thearefore take heede it take not vp your thoughtes so
much as to neglect that constant saruis you owe to your God.
When I liued abroode, I tasted something of thos willes:
thearefore I may the more experimentally giue you warneing.
Remember me to your tutor, in home I hope you will finde dayly
more and more cause to love and respect. I thanke God my coolde
is something better then when you left me. I pray God blles you,
and giue you of those saueing grasess which will make you happy
heare and for ever heareafter. 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley. 
(^Oct. 25, 1638.^)

<Q HAR 1638 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 14>
[} [\XV.\] }] 
[}TO MY DEARE SONNE, MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Good Need - This night Hall brought me your letter; but he is
so perplexed aboute the horses that he seems not to be Hall. He
was apointed by your father and meself to come downe by Oxford,
and to haue rested theare the Seboth; but the spoileing of the
horses did so distract him, that he can not say any thinge of
Oxford or Loundoun. I rwite you worde by the carrier that your
father did purpos to send to you this weake: my cosen Prisc
sending for his horsess, your father takes that opertunity to
send to your tutor. I take it for a great mercy of God, that you
haue your health; the Lord in mercy continue it to you, and be 
you carefull of your selfe: the meanes to presarufe health, is a
good diet and exersise: and, as I hope you are not wanteing in
your care for your health, so I hope you are much
<P 15>
more carefull for your soule, that that better part of yours may
growe in the wayes of knowledg. And in some proportion it is,
with the soule as with the body; theare must be a good dyet; we
must feede vpon the worde of God, which when we haue doun we
must not let it lye idell, but we must be diligent in
exersiseing of what we knowe, and the more we practes the more
we shall knowe. Deare Ned, let nothinge hinder you from
performeing constant priuet duties of prayeing and redeing.
Experimentally, I may say that priuet prayer is one of the beest
meanes to keepe the hart cloos with God. O it is a sweet thinge
to open our harts to our God, as to a frinde. If it had not bine
for that I had recours to my God sheure I should haue fainted
before this. I heare no nwes at this time from Loundoun, only
Mr. Wallker is still in prison; all my frinds theare are well,
and I thanke God all your frindes are well heare. Your father is
cheerefully well, and your brother Robert has had no fitte sence
you went. Your brother Tomas cried very much the other day,
becaus he thought howe he was vsed to fight with you at
Sheareswesbury. The Ember weake nowe drawes on a pase. I wisch
you and your tutor weare heare then; howesoeuer I hope, you will
in desires be with vs: and so our prayers, I hope, shall meete
in heauen, before the Lord. I thanke God, I am much better then
when I rwite last to you. I beceach the Lord to blles you, and
that you may be still the beloued childe of
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
   I haue sent a token to Mrs. Wilkinson: it is a box. Doo not
you vndoo the boxe; but deleuer it to her, eather yourself, or
send it by Gorge Griffits. It is two cruets of chinna, with
silluer and gilt couers, and bars and feete. Doo not let the
boxe be opened before she has it. 
   I haue giuen my cosen Prisis man a great charge of the box.
If it come safe, I will giue him a reward. 
   Send me word how he bringes the box.
   In hast affter sauper.
(^Desem. 11, 1638.^)

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 19>
[} [\XVIII. TO HER SON EDWARD.\] }] 
   My good Ned - I thinke it longe sence I hard from you, but my
hope is that you are well. My thoughtes are as much vpon you
now, as when you weare with me, and thearfore I must conclude,
that absence abates no loue, but that which is but a shawdow of
loue. I send this mesenger (whoo makes me beleeue he goos with a
good will) purposly to see you, and I hope, he will bringe me
the ashurance of your being well returned to Oxford. The carrier
sent me word you weare not returned on Tusday last. Your father
came well home from Heariford, on Saterday last; he was a
littell ill at Heriford, but I thanke God, he is very well nowe.
Your brother Robert has some times a fite; all the rest are
well, and I beleeue they will tell theaire owne mindes to you
themselfes. I hard of no other thinge they did at Heariford;
but, by order from the Lords, they haue made two
prouesmarchalls, to home they give +L20 pound a peace, euery
yeare, to ride well armed, and each of them a man, and to let
noe roges or idell persons wonder aboute the country; and the
depuetie liftenantes haue entertained two shoulders to
discipline all the bandes: on is taken out in your fathers
company, to be his sargent; his name is Weare; he has bine in
all theas wars in Jermany, and sarued vnder your ouncell S=r=
Tomas Conway; the others name I knowe not; and this I rwite you
word of, that you may not be ignorant of what is doune in your
owne cuntry. Your cosen Scriuen, they say, is to be a curenall,
if any troups goo vpon any saruis. He is called Curenall
Scriuen. For forane nwes, I beleeue, you haue hard that Briscake
is taken; and nowe the Curantes are lisened againe, you will
wekely see theare relations. Now, my deare Ned, howe much doo I
longe to see you, and the Lord in mercy still giue me that
comfort, that I may acounte you my beloued child, and the Lord
in mercy fille you with his gras, that so you may be louely in
His sight; and if you are beloued by the Lord, it is happines
enoufgh. None are partakers of his loue but 
<P 20>
his childeren; and he so loued them, that he gaue his sonne to
dye for them. O that we could but see the depthe of that loue of
God in Chirst to vs: then shure, loue would constraine vs to
serue the Lord, with all our harts most willingly. And this loue
of the Lord is not commen to all. Others may partake of his
mercy, as Ahab, who the Lord spared vpon his humeliation; and
they may partake of his power, as the Kinge in Samaria did, when
the Lord made plenty to flowe in the citty, affter so greate a
famine. And all his creaturs partake of his liberallity in
feeding them, and his most wise gouerning of the things heare
belowe; but none tastes of his loue but his chosen ones; and if
we be loued of the Lord, what need we care what the men of the
world thinke of vs? We in that respect, should be like a good
wife, whoo cares not, howe ill fauored all men ells thinke her,
if her husband loue her. And, my deare Ned, as this loue of the
Lord is his peculier gifte, only to his deare onse, let it be
your cheefe care to geet ashurance of that loue of God in
Christ; and, sence he has loued you, sheawe your loue to him, by
hateing that which he hates, which is sinn; and it was sin that
crucified our Lord, that so loued us that he gaue himself for
vs. My deare Ned, the eye, which I put vpon my owne soule, I put
you in minde of. Be constant in holy dutys; let publicke and
priuet goo to geather. Let not the on shoulder out the other. I
beleeue, before this, you haue reed some part of Mr. Caluin;
send me word how you like him. I haue sent you a littell purs
with some smale mony in it, all the pence I had, that you may
haue a penny to giue a power body, and a pare of gloufs; not
that I thinke you haue not better in Oxford, but that you may
some times remember her, that seldome as you out of my thoughts:
the Lord blles you.
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Janu: 14, 1638.^)
   I haue sent your tutor a smale token. I can not but desire to
sheawe thankes to him, who sheawes so much loue to you. I heare
in closed send you the bookebinedrs letter from Woster, that you
may see bookes are not so cheep theare as in Oxford.

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 23>
[} [\XXI.\] }] 
[}TO MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Good Ned - The last night the gardener brought me your
letter, which was a greate refrescheing to me, for I had not
bine well satisfied, neuer sence Martaine was with you, for he
toold me, you said you weare sleeppy that morneing he came away,
and that you spake
<P 24>
very littell to him; and not heareing, as I thought, so longe
from you, made me afraide; but nowe, I thanke God for his mercy
to me, that I haue hard with comfort from you. The Lord in mercy
continue your health, and, aboue, the Lord in his rich mercy
giue you such life in Christ, that you may haue a stronge and
liuely soule, allways actife in the ways of gras. My deare Ned,
be carefull of yourself, and forget not. Doo exersise; for
health can no more be had without it, then without a good diet.
I much reioyce, and giue the Lord thankes, that M=r= Pirkins was
an instruement to bringe two in my deare brothers famerly out of
darkenes into light, and from the power of sin, vnder the sweet
regement of our Lord Christ Jesus. I am confident, your worthy
tutor reioyces in it, that he did so shine as to bringe glory to
his Lord and Master; and as the worke is begonne, and we reioyce
in it, so I desire from my soule, that the Lord would perfect
it. I begone with this, becaus I most reioyce in it; and nowe I
must tell you, I am glad my brothers howes, is so well gouered,
and that his daughter and sonne are of so good dispocions. I
pray God, add gras to it, and then it will be a sweet harmmony.
I am not sorry that euery one tells you, you are like my lord. I
haue not bine very well theas three days, and so enforsed me to
keepe my beed, as I haue doune many times, when you weare with
me. I hope, I shall be able to rise to day. My letter should
haue bine longer, had not I bine in beed. I heare my Lord Conway
is goone suddainely into Ireland, and that he has a troup of
hoors, but more of that, a nother time. Your father, I hope, is
well. He purposed to be with M=r= Vahans at Mockes, and to be at
home this night. The Lord blles you, and beleeue that I am neuer
weary in expresing meself to be, 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Janu: 26, 1638.^)
   Deare Ned, - My agge is no secret; tho my brother Bray is
something mistaken in it. When I was maried to your father, your
father would haue bine asked in the chruch, but my lord would be
no means consent; what his reson was, I know not. Then they haue
a custome, that, when they fetch out the liscens, the agg of the
woman,
<P 25>
must be knowne; so that, if I would haue hide my agg, then it
must be knowne, and then I was betwne two or three and twenty. I
was not full three and twenty, but in the liscens they rwit me
three and twenty, and you knowe how longe I haue bine maried,
for you know how old you are, and you weare borne when I had
bine maried a yeare and 3 months. 
   My brother Bray has bine a maried man ever since I can
remember, and I neuer had much aquentance with him, but I knwe
he was my brother, and so I could not be a stranger to him, and
he is a very good man.

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 30>
[} [\XXV.\] }] 
[}TO MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My good Ned - The Lord in mercy blles you, and giue you
interest in his sonne Christ, and such a measure of holyness,
that you may liue heare like his child. It is my comfort, that
you inioye your health, and I beceach the Lord, to continue that
mercy to you. I perswade meself you are carefull to improufe
your time; this is your time of haruest, and that time being
ouer-slipt, it cannot be recalled. I am glad to heare you are
cheerefull. Inioy that bllesing, when God giues it you, for
cheerefullness of spirit giues more freedome in the performeance
of any duety. I hope, as you doo, that the nwes of so many being
masacred is not true; the great God of heawen and earth looke in
mercy vpon his poore peopell. It is reported, from all parts,
the french haue a very great army. I can not thinke yet, that
the french would take this time to come into Ingland, when we
stand vpon our garde and such preperations for wars. And the
report is, that theare goos 30000 fooute and 10000 hoors with
the king to Yorke; so that a forieng enimye could not come in a
time more disaduantages to him. But if we fight with Scotland,
and are ingaged in that ware, then a foren enimy may take his
time of aduantage. The caus is the Lords; and He will worke, for
his owne glory. Deare Ned, you may remember I haue offten spoke
to you aboute theas times; and my deare Ned, would I weare with
you one day, to open my minde more largly than I can by
rwriteing. They call to super, thearefore I must hasten my
letter, but first I must tell you, I haue sent you by the
carrier a boxe, derected to you, in which is a turky
<P 31>
pye and 6 pyes, such as my lord, your grandfather did loue. I
hope to remember you againe in lent. Send me word, wheather you
reseaue them, and wheather they be good. Mr. Simons is very ill
and very weake. I wisch his wife be not a widowe againe. For Mr.
Walcotes sake, I will perswade them to send theare sonne to your
tutor: but Mr. Cradock is the only man that preuails with them.
I thanke God, your Father is well, and so is your brothers and
sisters, with Ned Smith: so in hast, I rest,
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Pheb: 15, 1638.^)
   I haue sent your tutor a box of dryed plumes, the box is
derected to you; tell him it is a Lenten token. Remember my
saruis to him. 

<Q HAR 1638 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 33>
[} [\XXVII.\] }] 
[}FOR S=R= ROBERT HARLEY, KINGHT OF THE BATH.}]
   My deare S=r=, - This is only to let you knowe, we are all
well, which I had rather tell you, then send the bare message by
another. I blless God, that you are well; and hope the Lord,
will giue you a safe returne home to morrow, wheare you are
longed for. Nowe the Lord in mercy presarue you from all that is
euile; desireing still to be beloued by you, as
   Your most affectinat wife, Brilliana Harley.
(^Mar: 12, 1638.^)

<Q HAR 1638 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 33>
[} [\XXVIII.\] }] 
[}TO MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, OXFORD.}]
   My good Ned - The last weake being not well, I could not
inioye this contentment of rwiteing to you. You may remember,
that when you weare at home, I was offten enforsed to keepe my
beed; it pleases God, it is so with me still, and when I haue
thos indispotions, it makes me ill for some time affterwards. It
is the hand of my gratious God; and tho it be sharp, yet when I
looke at the will of God in it, it is sweetned to me: for to me,
theare is nothing can sweeten any condistion to vs, in this
life, but as we looke at God in it, and see ourselfs his
saruants in that condistion in which we are. Thearefore when I
consider my owne afflictions, they are not so bitter, when I
looke at the will of my God in it. He is pleased it should be
so, and then, should not I be pleased it should be so? And I
hope, the Lord will giue me a hart still to waite vpon my God;
and I hope the Lord will looke gratiously vpon me. 
<P 34>
And my dearest, beleeue this from mee, that theare is no
sweetnes in any thinge in this life to be compared to the
sweetnes in the saruis of our God, and this I thanke God, I cane
say, not only to agree with thos that say so, but
experimentally; I haue had health and frinds and company in
variety, and theare was a time, that what could I have saide I
wanted; yet in all that theare was a trubell, and that which
gaue me peace, was sarueing of my God, and not the saruis of the
world. And I haue had a time of siknes, and weakenes, and the
loose of frinds, and as I may say, the glideing away of all thos
things I tooke most comfort in, in this life. If I should now
say (which I may booldly) that, in this condistion, O howe sweet
did I finde the loue of my God, and the endeuor, to walke in his
ways; it may be, some may say, then it must needs be so, becaus
all other comforts failed me; but my deare Ned I must lay both
my condistions togeather; my time of freedome from afflictions,
and my time of afflictions; and in the one, I found a sweetnes
in the saruis of God, aboue the sweetnes of the things in this
life, and in trubele a sweetnes in the saruis of God, which
tooke away the bitternes of the affliction; and this I tell you,
that you may beleeue howe good the Lord is, and beleeue it, as a
tryed truth, the saruis of the Lord, is more sweet, more
peaceabell, more delightful, then the enioyeing of all the
vadeing pleashurs of the world. My deare Ned, I thanke you for
your letter by the carrier this wake. Howe soeuer trubells may
befall me, yet if it be well with you, I reioyce. I thanke God,
that you injoy your health. The Lord in mercy continue it to
you. My deare Ned, I longe to see you; but I feare it will not
be a great whille. I know not well when the Acte is, and I
thinke I must not looke to see you tell the Act be past.
Whensoeuer it is, I beceach the Lord, giue vs a happy seeing on
of another. I am sorry my lady Corbet takes no more care of her
chilederen. S=r= Andwe Corbet left two thousand pounds a year.
Shee has a way that I should not take, by my good will with my
chillderen, without it weare to correct some great fallt in
them; but my deare Ned, as longe as it pleases God, I haue it, I
<P 35>
shall willingly giue what is in my power, for the beest
adwantage of you, and your brothers and sisters, as ocation
offers itself. Vse your cosen Corbet kindely. I heare his
broother goos alonge with the kinge to Yorke, which he dous,
becaus he estemes it to be the gallentry of a yonge man. I sent
you the last weake a list of thos shoulders, which they say must
goo with the kinge. I heare that the Loundoners haue refused to
send any of theare trained band, answering, theare weare so many
strangers in Loundon, that they feared to let any of theare
strentg goo from them. I hard that the kinge caused all the
strangers to be numbered in Loundon, and the number of them was
two hundred thousand. On wenday last your father had some of his
shoulders at Brometon, whean they dyned, and spent the day in
trayneing. I wisched you with me, but I did not see them, for
then I was not abell to goo out of my chamber: but now I thanke
God, I am, and haue some thoughts, if pleas God, to goo to
chruch the next Lords day. Good Mr. Gower has an ague. Mr.
Simons begins to mend. My cosen Prise is something better. You
forget to rwit to Mr. Gower; he has had 4 fitts. Mr. Simons
tooke your letter very kindely. I must needs say, I neuer had
any maide that profest more respect to you, than Mary Barton,
and I beleeue it is in truth; for shee is her fathers daughter
and can not desembell. I finde her as good a saruant as euer I
had; if I coould but put a littell water in her wine, and make
her temper her hastiness! yet I cannot say that euer shee gaue
me any ill word, but theare is still the spirit of enuy
raingeing amongest some of the saruants, but the humers of my
saruants swaye not my affection, and, I hope, shall neuer
blinde my judgment: my deare Ned the Lord blles you.
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^in hast, Mar: 22, 1638.^)
   Your brothers and sisters and cosen Smith I thanke God are
well. 
   Tell Gorg Griffets I had not time to rwit to him, which I did
desire to haue doun. I haue sent him the mony for M=r= Neelham,
the
<P 36>
drawer, and I would haue him hasten the sending of the peace of
cloth, which he had to drawe. I hope Gorge will bide his
countryman wellcome. I had him into my chamber to see him,
becaus he went to Oxford. I like it very well, that you goo with
your tutor to my brother Brays. I beceach the Lord to goo alonge
with you, in all your ways. 
   Heare inclosed is a booke of nwes. Your father I thanke God
is well. He goos and pleas God on Tuesday to the bischops upon a
commistion aboute some land that is in question betwne the
bischop and another gentellman.

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 39>
[} [\XXXI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY, IN MAGDELINE HALLE,
OXFORD.}]
   Deare Ned - Theare is no earthly thinge that is of more
comefort to me than your being well, thearefore you may easely
beleeue your letters are sweet comforts to me, and so was your
letter this weake. I blles my God that you haue your health, and
the Lord in mercy continue that comfort to you and me. My deare
Ned, I should be exceeding glad, if your tutor would be willing
to let you come home at Whitesuntide; if he will but say the
word, I beleeue all partyes would agree; but then I thinke you
would desire to goo to the Act, and that would be to much for
you; for I desire if pleas the Lord, to haue you at home the
longe vacation as they call it. My deare Ned, let me knowe your
minde, wheather you are willing, and wheather 
<P 40>
your tutor be so too, but so that he will be pleased to spend
some time with vs at Bromtone. As they doo at Oxford, so they
doo in all places, take liberty to inuaye against Puretans. We
heare the Scothes haue taken the posestion of the kings howes in
Eddenboro. Shure this somer is likely to produce greate matters.
The Lord sheawe mercy vpon his poor saruants. I hard the queene
as soune as the knige left Loundon to goo towards Yorke, went to
her beed with much sorrow. 
   I rwite to you on wensday last by the gardner, but it was in
such hast that I beleue you could hardly reede it. I rwit you
word your cosen Prise had made your father and my cosen Smith
his excexotors, and thus he has disposed of his estate; they say
his land is worth 300 a yare; he owes 2 thousand and 5 hundered
pound and some say 3 hunderd pound more. He has giuen to his two
sisters chillderen, 12 hundred pounds, and to his brother, 30
pounds a yare anwety; this will he made when he was last at
Loundon, and brought it your father, maneing that if any thinge
did a rise aboue his deets and leggessess, it should come to his
excexetors. 
   Remember my saruis to worthy M=r= Perkins, and let him knowe,
the mony shall be sent with all expedition: the sikenes of his
scoller is as I aprehinde it, a happy sikenes; for for the most
part we are all rather to senceles, then to aprehencif of the
condistion of the state of our soules. I thanke God, your father
is indiferent well, he dous not keepe his chamber. Doctor
Deodate is not yet come, but I beleeue, he will come this night.
My deare Ned, I thanke you for hopeing with me, that I should
haue my desire in gooing to chruch, which I thanke God, I did
two saboths, and I hope the Lord will giue me that mercy this
next saboth. I thanke God, your brother Robert has his health
well, and so has the rest; some of the sarwants haue agues, but
not very violently. Good M=r= Simons has his ague euery day and
many fairt his life. I haue toold you if you remember of a paper
that some statemen make use of, when they would not haue knowne
what they riwit of. Rwite me worde wheather you vnderstand what
I meane. I pray God blles you and fill you
<P 41>
with gras, that sauefeing gras which will neuer leaufe you. I
haue not yet reseaufed your letter by Mr. Hackleut, but I hope I
shall; so I rest 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^April 5, 1639.^)
   I thanke you for the booke you sent, but yet I nor your
father heau not reed any of it. 
   Heare incloesed is the key of your box, with a token from
your sisters. I should be exceeding glad to see my brother Bray
and my sister.

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 43>
[} [\XXXIV.\] }] 
[}TO MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, AT MAGDELIN HALL,
OXFORD.}]
   My deare Ned - I haue two letters to thanke you for, on by
the
<P 44>
carrier and on by the gardner; the gardner came not to Bromton
tell wensday last; he says he was sike by the way, but I beleeue
this has loost his creedet for gooing any more journys. My deare
Ned, it is my joy that you are well, and I beceach the Lord in
mercy to continue this bllesing of health to you, but aboue all,
I desire you may haue that true health in your soule of a sounde
minde, that so in theas days of wafereing and douteing you may
hoold the truth. I was not well pleased that I did not keepe my
woord in sending to you this weake. I hope the next weake your
father will send, and thearefore I only rwite theas feawe lines
by the carrier to let you knowe I haue sent you a pigon pye; and
much good may it doo you when you eate it. Your father returned
from the bischops this night. I thanke God he is well: he prays
God to bless you, and so dous
   Your affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Apr. 19, 1639^)
   Remember my saruis to your worthy tutor.

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 51>
[} [\XL.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - This mornig, with no smale contentment, I reseued
your letter by the carrier; it is my joy that you are well, and
I beceach the Lord to continue your health to you; and, my deare
Ned, be carefull to doo exersis. I did beleue that you did
forget to send the letter which you rwite me word of, but now I
haue reseued it, and thanke you for it. It is strang to me how
fasting and prayer can agree with treacherous weapons, as
kinifes and such like; thearefore, for my part, I will vnbeleeue
the one of them, eather that they doo not fast and pray, or that
they doo not make prouition of such wepons. Theare was a report
that the kinge was goone to Loundoun, which came to his eare, at
which he was much displeased. I hard that marquise Hamlenton was
gone with 7000 men to land them in Scotland. Captaine
Brandsheave is gouerner 
<P 52>
of Barek. My deare Ned, theas things are of the Lord, and as
none thought of such a biusnes as this is, so we are as ignorant
whate the issue will be: the Lord giue vs harts of depentances
vpon him. 
   Haueing bine offtin not well, and confined to so sollatary a
place as my beed, I made choys of an entertainement for meself,
which might be eassy and of some benifit to meself; in which I
made choys to reade the life of Luther, rwite by Mr. Calluen. I
did the more willingly reade it, becaus he is generally branded
with ambistion, which caused him to doo what he did, and that
the papis doo so generally obrade us that we cannot tell wheare
our religion was before Luther; and some haue taxt him of an
imteperat life. Theas resons made me desire to reade his life,
to see vpon what growned theas opinions weare biult; and finding
such satisfaction to meself, how fallsly theas weare raised, I
put it into Inglisch, and heare in closed haue sent it you; it
is not all his life, for I put no more into Inglisch then was
not in the booke of Marters. 
   Theas things of note I finde in it, firstly, what Luther
acknowledgs, he was instructed in the truth by an old man, whoo
led him to the doctrine of justification by faith in Christ: and
Erasmas, when his opinion was asked of Luther, said he was in
the right. It is true the truth was much obscured with error;
and then it pleased the Lord to rais up Luther as a trumpet to
proclame His truth, and as a standered barare to hoold out the
ensinge of His truth; which did but make thos to apeare of the
Lords side, whoo weare so before. And it is aparent to me, that
no ambistious ends moued Luther; for in all the cours of his
life he neuer sheawed ambistion: tho he loued lerneing, yet, as
fare as I can obsarue, he neuer affected to be estemed more
lerned than he was. So that in Luther we see our owne fasess;
they that stand for the old truee way they bring vp nwe
doctriner, and it is ambistion, vnder the vaile of religion.
Another obseruation I finde in Luther, that all his fasting and
striknes, in the way of Popery, neuer gaue him peace of
concience; for he had greate feares tell he had throughly
learned the doctrine of justification by Christ alone; and so it
will be with vs all; no
<P 53>
peace shall we haue in our owne righteousness. And one thinge
more I must tell you, that I am not of theaire minde whoo
thinke, if he had bine of a milder temper it had bine better;
and so Erasmas says; but I thinke no other spirit could haue
sarued his turne. He was to cry aloude, like a trumpet; he was
to haue a Jonas spirit. Thus, my deare Ned, you may see how
willingly I impart any thinge to you, in which I finde any good.
I may truely say, I neuer inioy any thinge that is good but
presently my thoughts reflect vpon you; but if any thinge that
is euill befall me, I would willing beare it all me self, and so
willingly would I beare the ill you should haue, and reioyce
that you should inioy what is good. Your father is now at
Hariford; I hope he will be at home to morrow. Your brothers are
well, and so as your sistwers and cosen Smith. Mr. Simons is
recouered, and teaches the scoule againe. Mr. Gowers ague hangs
a littell vpon him. My deare Ned, I knowe you doo not loue
medicines, yet I would faine haue you drinke, this May, some
scuruigras pounded and strained with beare, if theare be any to
be had in Oxford; it is a most excelent thinge to purge the
blood. 
   My deare Ned, the Lord in heauen blles you, and giue me a
comfortabell seeing of you. So I rest, in hast,
   Your most affectinat Mother, Brilliana Harley.
   Remember my saruis to your worthy tutor. Tell Gorg his mother
is looked for at Bromton to night. His brother is goone to
Teuxbery; I beleeue you knowe his biusness.
(^May 10, 1639.^)
   I haue made a pye to send you; it is a kide pye. I beleeue
you haue not that meate ordinaryly at Oxford; on halfe of the
pye is seasned with on kinde of seasening, and the other with
another. I thinke to send it by this carrier. 

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 60>
[} [\XLVI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY, IN MAGDELINE HALL,
OXFORD.}]
   Deare Ned - I rwite to you yesterday, and I beleeue to many
others I should haue aleaged that, as an excuse for not rwiteing
at this time, yet I cannot give meself leaufe to do so to you,
but willingly I vse a kinde of violence to my other ocations, in
takeing time to rwite to you, sence I cannot haue the
contentment in speaking to you. I reseued your letter by the
carrier this morning, so that Moene is now in request againe. 
   I blles God that you are well, and my deare Ned, be carefull
of yourself; be carefull of the health of your body for my sake;
and aboue all, be carefull of the health of your soule for your
owne and my sake; and as to the body, thos things doo most hart
which are of a deadly quallity as poyson, so nothing harts the
soule like that
<P 61>
deadly poyson of sinn; thearefor, my dearest, be wacthfull
against thos great and suttile and vigilent enimys of your
presious soule. I beleeue you knowe that one of the best parts
of a soulder is to stand vpon his garde, and his greatest shame
(next to runeing away) not to be found so; so is it in our
spirituall warefare; if Sathen surprise vs, he takes vs at his
will, and if we turne our bakes and rune away, O! he will persue
tell we be taken. My deare Ned, I beleeue you are confident that
you are most deare to me, thearefore thinke it not strange, if I
am stuedious and carefull that your peace should be keept with
your God, whous fauor is better then life. I longe to see you,
and I hope I shall doo it shortly. I hope before this, you haue
reseued your hate and stokens, but Burigh is something ngligent.
Your father is, I thanke God, well; he is ride abroode. In hast,
I giue you this ascurance that I am 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Bromton, July 5, 1639.^)
   Remember my loue to your worthy tutor. I should haue rwit to
Gorg, but I haue not time. Your father has diuers times sence
you went asked for strawbery butter, and in memory of you this
day I made Hacklet make some. I wisch you a disch of it.

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 64>
[} [\XLIX.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - My cosen Adams returne from Woster was very
wellcome to me, becaus he aschured me of your comeing well so
fare on your journy, and I trust the same gratious Prouidence
brought you to your journis end. Your letter was very wellcome
to me, for, my deare Ned, I cannot but say that I inioy meself
with more comfort when you are with me, and next seeing you, to
heare from you is most pleasing to me. Heare has bine strangers
euer since you went, and on M=r= Acton came apurpos to see you.
He was of the same howes you are of, but left it that yeare you
came theather. I
<P 65>
like him as well as any yonge jentellman I haue seene a greate
while. 
   I thanke God your father is well, and this day gone ahunting,
and your brothers with him, it being procured with much
dificullty from M=r= Simons. 
   My deare Ned, the Lord blles you and giue you that heauenly
wisdome to remember your Creator in the days of your youth, that
you may sarufe your God with an vpright hart, and the Lord in
mercy teach you to profet in all the ways of wisdome, and leade
you in the way in which you should walke. My deare Ned, omite
not priuet dutyes, and stire vp your self to exercise yourself
in holy conference, begg of God to giue you a delight in
speaking and thinkeing of thos thinges which are your eternall
treasure. I many times thinke Godly conference is as much
neglected by Gods chillderen, as any duty. I am confident you
will noways neglect the opertunity of profeting in the ways of
lerning, and I pray God prosper your endeuors. My deare Ned, my
thoughts weare filled with other obiects that morning you went
away, which made me forget to giue you directions about the
stufe I spake to you of; but I gaue Ions a pettren of what kinde
of stufe I would haue; but I did not tell him any thinge ells;
and I beleue he had not wite to conseafe my meaneing, that you
should chus the culler. 
   Remember my loue to your worthy tutor, and still beleeue that
I much reioyce when I can expres meself to be 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
   My cosen Dauis presents her saruis to you.
(^Octo: 18. 1639^.)
   I would have you send this inclosed letter as soune as you
can to S=r= Gilles Bray, but by a safe hand. 
   I haue sent you a baskett of Stoken apells; theare are 4 or 5
of another kinde. I hope you will not dispice them, comeing from
a frinde, tho they are not to be compared to Oxford appells. 
   In the basket with the appells is "the Returne of Prayer." I
could
<P 66>
not find the place I spake of to your tutor, when he was with
me; but since, I found it, and haue sent the booke to you, that
he may see it, and judg a littell of it; for my part, I am not
of that openion, that God will not grant the prayer of others,
for the want of our joyeing with the rest, or that God dous
stand vpon such a number; but I am not perrentory, but upon good
reson I hope I shall yeald: but this I thinke and beleeue, that
none joyne in prayer with others but thos that simpathise on
with another; for it is not the consenting to, but the ernest
desireing of the same.

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 68>
[} [\LII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - S=r= Richard Newport is pleased to doo me the
honnor to conuaie this letter to you, and Ihope you will haue
the aduantag of waiteing vpon him; and I can not but acounte it
an aduantage to be in the presence of such a man.
   I pray God blles you, and giue you a hart to be in loue with
thos ways of wisdome, which will make you for euer happy. 
   Your brothers and sisters are well.
   So in hast I rest
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Oct. 31, 1639. Bromton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1639 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 75>
[} [\LVIII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY, IN MAGDELINE HALL,
OXFORD}]
   Deare Ned - With much contentment I haue reseued this weakes
letter from you. I acknowledg the Lords mercy to me in the
continuance of your health, which is a joy to me in the midest
of many ocations of sorrow; and I beceach the Lord I may still
haue that refreschment to see it goo well with you, and to see
it best with your better part, so that you may euery day more
and more aproufe yourself, not only a branch but a member of
Christ. 
   I much reioyce in the hope of seeing you, but I trust I shall
haue more joy in seeing you. I am glad your worthy tutor will
come with you, by which I see, he is not an obstinate man. A
pare of rideing stokens I haue prouided for you, which I purpos,
if pleas God, to send you by the horses that shall be sent for
you; and knoweing your tutors minde for a hors and saddell, I
will endeuor to haue him fitted, that tho the ways may be fooule
yet his seate may be eassy. I rwit you word that my lord
admarall was spoken to, but that would not doo, but it was my
lord depuety of Irland that preuailed to geet your father off
from being sherefe. Thinges goo wors in Scotland then euer they
did, and it is said theare will be wars; for my part I did
allways doute that that buisnes would not so end as many others
thought; neaither am I now of theare mindes, that that kingdome
will eassely be subdued. The Lord in mercy inabell all His
childeren to fixe theare eyes on Him, that so, trusting in the
Lord, we may neuer be dismayed. It is thought that such a number
of Scote minesters will not be suffred to goo out of Scotland.
   The prince elector is put in prison in France; into the same
prison wheare princ Casemere is, and Jhon de Wart. It is thought
the prince elector will not be seet at liberty; it was fitte he
should goo vnknowne; he did disguise himself, but went with such
a traine that he could not but be inquired affter. Thus we see,
my deare
<P 76>
Ned, all condistions are liabell to misery; and the greater the
person is, the greater is the misery; so that honnor dous but
enhanse pouerty, or shame or imprisonment: yet man is so
forgetfull of his God, that all, and most of all great men, liue
in prosperity as if they weare lords of what they had,
forgetting that they are but tennants at will. 
   Your father has promised Mr. Simons +L110 for his howes,
which is as much as he gaue for it, and now he has had it two
years, so that now he is no louser. 
   Mr. Blineman is goone from Walcot. 
   I thanke God your father is well, and I am now abell to be
out of beed. I haue not bine so well for aboue this weake as I
use to be, and with it I haue been trubled with much heauiness
at my hart. I thanke God your brothers and sisters and your
cosen Smith are well. Deare Ned, if theare be any good lookeing
glasses in Oxford, shuse me one aboute the biggnes of that I use
to drees me in, if you remember it. I put it to your choys,
becaus I thinke you will chuse one, that will make a true ansure
to onse face. 
   All my frute disches are brocken; thearefore, good Ned, if
theare be any shuch blwe and white disches as I vse to haue for
frute, bye me some; they are not purslane, nor they are not of
the ordinary mettell of blwe and white disches. I beleeue you
remember what I vse to haue; if you chuse them against the
horses come for you, I will take order with the men about the
bringeing of them home, and will send mony to pay for them. I
see your sister has a nwe hude; it semes shee lost hers and
durst not tell, and so, as I gees, rwit to you for one, which I
will pay you for. I haue sent you my wacth, and I beleeue it may
be mended. I doo willingly giue you the rige of goold that was
aboute the agget. 
   I am hartely sorry for the death of M=r= Knightly. I heare my
lady Wesmorland is brought to beed of a daughter. My lady Veere
was with her, and I thinke shee is so still. 
   I did thinke your father would haue sent mony by Miller; it
<P 77>
seemes it was forget, but he indends to doo it by the men that
goo for you. 
   Remember my loue to your tutor, to home I wisch the frueition
of all happines. 
   I hope to see him, and thearefore I doo not rwit to him. 
   My deare Ned, the Lord blles you and giude you in all your
thoughts words and actions, that you may still looke vpon them
as seeing the ways of an vpright hart. So I rest
   Your affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Noue: 29, 1639. Bromton Castell.^)
   My Lord rwit word this weake that he thought he should not
goo this yeare to Louddington.
   I would haue 6 frute disches.

<Q HAR 1640 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 80>
[} [\LXII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, IN MAGDALENE HALL,
OXFORD.}]
   My dear Ned - Yesterday I reseued your letter by my cosen
Dauis, and this day yours by the carrier, both weare very
wellcome to me, and I desire to acknowledg Gods mercy to me,
that you inioy your health, which I pray God you long doo, with
a hart desirous to spend all your strentgh and health to the
glory of your God. 
   My deare Ned, I thanke you for your ernest desire for my
health. I am, I think, better for your prayers. I did not send
for doctor [^BLANK IN THE TEXT^] to take phisick, for I thanke
God I was not sike, but I knwe I had need of cordialls, and thos
I toucke of doctor Deodate and not of Doctor Rwit. I thanke God
I am now abell to site up a littell. This day I sate vp out of
my beed allmost an ower. I should be glad to haue you with me,
since I can let your thoughts run with me. I did not thinke I
had bine with child when you weare with me. The Lord blles you,
and make you still a comfort to
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Pheb. 8. 1639. Bromton.^)
   Your father, brothers and sisters are well. 
   Remember my saruis to y=r= worthy tutor, whoo I hope
remembers me in his prayers, for I doo him in mine.

<Q HAR 1640 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 82>
[} [\LXV.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, IN MAGDILINE HALL,
OXFORD.}]
   Deare Ned - This morning I reseued your letter, I thanke you
for it, and I much reioyce that you are well. Miller toold me
that you did cut your wood for exercise, which I am glad of, but
your father would not haue you cut but sawe your wood. I tell
him, I thinke you doo saw it. Your father tooke some coold,
which made him ill sence Miller went, but now I thanke God, he
is well agayne and abroode. For meself, my dear Ned, I am still
weake, and, I thinke, allmost as weake as affter lyeing in of
any of my chillderen, but your sister Dorrity; yester I was vp a
littell. I haue sent you a gammon of backen by this carrier, and
a Lenten tocken of dried sweetmeats for your tutor, but it is
directed to you; if I had bine well I had sent you a larger
prouition for Lent. I hard that theare weare 500 
<P 83>
men sent to Barwicke. I pray God direct them what to doo. The
Lord blless you and presarue you in His feare. Deare Ned, be
carefull of your self, and beleeue that I am, 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley. 
(^Phe: 20, 1639.^)
   Remember me to worthy M=r= Pirkins. 
   I haue sent the water for Elsabethe Stanton, she may take 2
or 3 spounefulls at a time, shee should take it as soune as shee
finds any inclination to a fite; the best way to take it is with
2 or 3 spounfulls of parseley water.
   The dried appells are for you. 
   Sam Pinner waits on your brothers, and I think Blechly goos
away; your father dous not like her.

<Q HAR 1640 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 87>
[} [\LXX.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, IN MAGDELIN HALL,
OXFORD.}]
   Deare Ned - This morning I reseued your letter, and I thanke
you for it; for sence I cannot see you, I gladly entertaine your
letters. I much reioyce that in all places they are so carefull
to chues worthy men for so greate a buisnes, as the parlament. 
   I rwit you word the last weake, that your father and S=r=
Waltr Pye weare chosen for HerifordScheere, and that your father
would not haue you goo out of Oxford, becaus he purposes to goo
to Loundon shortly. I thinke he will goo the weake before Ester.
On tusday next, if pleas God, your father will keep a day; I
beleeue you vnderstand what day I meane. Mr. Moore and S=r=
Robert Howard are chosen for Bischops Castell. This weake I hard
from my sister Pelham; I thanke God shee is well. But I am sorry
that they haue made choys of a tutor for theare sonne in
Magdeline coledg; it is on Mr. Rogers. As sonne as his ouncell
has prouided 
<P 88>
him a chamber he is to come to Oxford. Your father did not goo
this weake to the assises, becaus of his many buisnescess; this
day he is gone to Loudlow. I thanke God he is indeferent well.
Your brothers and sisters are well. Remember me to your worthy
tutor; and I pray God blles you, and make you still a comfort to
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Mar: 20, 1639. Bromton Castel.^)
   Tell Gorg Griffits that his father and mother are well. I
hard from them the last night.
   I thanke God I begin to rise agane out of my beed.

<Q HAR 1640 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 89>
[} [\LXXIII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY, IN MAGDELINE HALL,
OXFORD.}]
   My Deare Ned - Sence I can not see you, I am glad of theas
opertunitys by which I may let you know my thoughts are offten
with you; your father being from me, I haue not much company to
take pleashure in, but this is a Chirstians comfort, that God is
all ways with them. I should be glad to heare from you a
relation how the king went to parlament, and at what ease you
hard his 
<P 90>
speche; for I did feare theare would be a great crowde, which
made me desire your father not to be theare. I heare your father
had a fitt of the pastion of the hart, the day before yow went
from Loundon. I beceach the Lord presaruef him from them. Heare
is great presing. M=r= Harberd is goon with his trop of hors; on
of his soulders killed a man in Shearsbury, but they say he was
prouocked to it. They are gallant and merry. The trained band is
thought must goo, or ells prouid men to goo in theiare places. I
can not yet heare for sartaine wheare theair randeuous is. 
   I haue sent you by Loocker some violet cakes. Deare Ned, be
carefull of your self, especially be wacthfull ouer your hart.
   Edward Piners chillderens beed was seet on fier, and it was
Gods mercy they had not bine smothered. Piner in puting of it
out, haueing none to healp him but Pheebe, whoo is with his
wife, tooke coold, for he was in his shirt, and the smoke
allmost tooke away his breath, that he is very ill, and I feare
has a feauor; it was on firer on wensday night; they rang the
bell, which feared all my howes. I pray God to blles you.
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Apri: 25, 164 . Bromton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1640 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 93>
[} [\LXXVI. TO HER SON EDWARD.\] }] 
   [\ENDORSED,\] "For your deare selfe."
   My deare Ned - I thanke you for your letter this weake by the
carrier; beleeue it, your lines are sweetly wellcome to me; it
is my joy that you are well; the Lord in mercy presarufe you in
health both of body and mind. 
   I much desire to see you, and thearefore I haue rwit to your
father, to desire him to giue you leafe to come home at
Whitsontide. 
   I thanke you for imparting to me what you know of the
parlament, and I will requite you with what I knowe. Theas which
I send you I had from my cosen Goowdine; you may keepe them, for
I had them rwit out for you. Edward Piner begins to goo abrood.
Your brothers and sisters are well. I am not yet out of my beed.
Remember me to your tutor.
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^May 8, 1640.^)

<Q HAR 1640 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 99>
[} [\LXXXII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, IN MAGDILINE HALL,
OXFORD.}]
   Deare Ned - I believe you doo as willing reseafe my letters
as I rwit them, which makes me willingly to take all oportunitys
to give you aschurance I am nowaye vnmindful of you. Your father
has fully agreed with my cosen Vahan and her sister, whoo went
from heance this morning, and about that biuesnes he now sends
to Loundon; so that this bearer is to rest at Oxford, on the
fast. We heare a confidente report that the kinge is agreed with
the Scoths, and I hope it is true. Your father, I thanke God, is
well. I have resued the booke you sent me, and thanke you for
it. I beleeue I shall like it well, for the subiet is very
needfull to be knowne, and the aughter of it, is of judgment,
thearefore I beleeue he has doun it well. The wellknoweing how
fure our pastions are good and how fure euill, and the right way
to goworne them is dificule; and in my obseruation I see but
feawe, that are stutidious to gouerne theaire pastions, and it
is our pastions that trubells our selfs and others. 
   Deare Ned, I longe to see you, and I hope I shall with
comfort. Mr. Salawewell is with your father. The Lord in mercy
fitt you and us for the day of fast, and I hope Mr. Gower will
preach at Oxford. Mr. Heath will be at Bromton on the fast. I
looke that Mr. Pirkins should rwite to me when he will let you
come home. 
<P 100>
I pray God blles you and fill you with gras, which is the best
riches. 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^July 4, 1640. Bromton Castell.^)
   Remember my loue to your worthy tutor. The messenger is not
yet returned out of Linconscheer.

<Q HAR 1640 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 103>
[} [\LXXXVIII.\] }] 
[}TO MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I thanke you for your letter from Mr.
Sallwells. I much reioyce that you so well endured so fare of
the iourney, and I hope my God safe prouidence has brought you
to London: my hart is much with you, and I desire to haue it
much with my God, for you. It is my comfort that you desire to
submite your self to the dispos of our gratious God; His way is
best; and the Lord in mercy giue you allways the eye of faith to
see it is so.
   Deare Ned, be carefull of your self, and let me know how it
is with you. Mr. Gower came home last night late and weet; and I
feare your father and you had a weet day of it. I heare that
parlament is ajourned for 10 days, but I defer my beleefe. I
haue not bine yet out of my beed, but I thanke God I am
indeferent well;
<P 104>
your brothers and sisters are well. I beceach the Lord to blles
you and keepe you safe, under His holy protection; so I rest
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Noue: 30, 1640. Bromton Castell.^) 
   Your truncke is sent to Oxford.

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 109>
[} [\XCIV.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I thanke you for your letter this weake; I
reseued it not tell this morning, and then it was wellcome. I
thought at the first I had no letter from you, becaus yours had
no shuperscription; but I was well pleased to be so disceaued.
It is a great comfort to me to hear the parlament goos on so
happily, and that the kinge has consented that the insendereis
should be judged. M=r= Braughton is now at Bromton, and I
beleefe, if Mr. Tomkins be not burges for Webly, he will on
munday: Mr. Gower purposes to goo to Heereford, to consult
aboute the scandolous ministers, and thos places which haue
none. I am glad theare is likly to be so good a corespondency
betwne us and the Duch. I am glad to heare my lord is well, but
I haue not hard from him yet. Theare is a very fine discours
rwiten in Italien, but translated in to Latine; it is dedicated
to Oxsensterne, he that was tresure to the king of Sweden; if
the book desarfe the comendation I could wisch you did reade it,
but I can not send you the titell of the booke. I thanke God
your brothers and sisters are very well. I pray God blles you,
and keepe your hart aboue all the thinges in this life; so I
rest, 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Janu: 9, 1640 Bromton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 113>
[} [\C.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - I hope M=r= Gower will finde you with your
father, wheare I am glad to haue you be, and I hope your father
will not let you goe from him. I hope your father will hasten
M=r= Gower downe againe. I heare my cosen Vahan would not put
his hand to the petion, nor did not geet any hands. Deare Ned,
send me word wheather thos that haue put in the petions against
bis: haue taken the hands of all such as doo not vnderstand what
they haue put 
<P 114>
theaire hands to. I am toold that it is the way in all cuntrys,
and that M=r= Macworths gaue such derections. To me it dous not
sound reasnabell; for, in my opinion, such hands should be taken
as vnderstand it, and will stand to what thay haue doun. 
   I heare my Lord Straford is aquesused of most abominabel
maters, but I haue not hard any particulars. I had a letter from
my cosen Harry Pelham, in which he dous much commend you. I
beleefe you finde him to sauer more of religion than his brother
Hurberd. I am glad my brother is not goon to the army, and that
my cosen Farfex has the honner of knightwood added to him. My
lady Veere rwit me word, that shee was glad that you weare with
your father, for shee thought it would be an aduantage to you. 
   I hope the Lord will still gooalonge with the parlament, and
tho wicked men wacth for theaire failleing, that they shallbe
disaponted. 
   I blles God that you finde yourself well; I beceach the Lord
to continue your health, and aboue all, that you may inioy a
sound judgment, an vpright hart, large affectionons to your God,
which is the true health of the minde. Deare Ned, be carefull of
yourself, and the more for my sake. 
   Rwit me word what imployment your father puts Gorge Griffits
brother to, which M=r= Griffits toold me he sent vp the last
weake to your father. I haue heare inclosed sent you 11=sh= for
the glases you sent me downe; they are very good and came very
well to me. 
   I thanke God my coold is much better then it was, and I hope
gooing away.
   I am now out of my beed; this is the first day. I pray God
blles you. 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Pheb: 15, 1640. Bromton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1640 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 116>
[} [\CIII. TO HER SON EDWARD.\] }]
   Deare Ned - I haue reseued your letter by my cosen Dauis; it
was wellcome tho it was short. My cosen Dauis telles me, your
father is very well and that you are so, which is a great
comfort to me; and I hope that the Lord will giue your father
dubell strentgh, to vndergoo the waight of thos imployments
which lye vpon him. And I hope you will not repent your being at
Loundoun with your father, which I gees will be more aduantage
to you, then if you had bine at Oxford.
<P 117>
   My cosen Dauis is not cleere yet in his biusnes; for M=r=
Edwards will not out; he slites what they say; and says M=r=
Dauis goos about like a premouter. He says, he would be sent for
vp to Loundoun, that he may informe the parlament with what
vntruths my cosen Dauis has toold them. I never hard of a man
that was not out of his sences, that was so careles to doo like
a resnabell man, as M=r= Edwards is; he seames to let himself
loose to be led by his pastions. I hope my cosen Dauis makes a
ronge judgment; for he thinkes my lord Straford will not haue
his sentence, and that some other thinges will fall out. My
cosen Dauis charges dous not pleas him, becaus it is no more.
   Your letter by Jhon Wall was very wellcome to me, and I
thanke you for it. I hope the Lord will disapoint all the plots
of thos that haue evill will at the prosperity of Gods chruch.
Your letter has giuen me much content, for I feared that some
would take ocation by the Scots declaration to vrge against
them; but I hope the Lord will pasefy all distempers. I am glad
to heare my brother is well, and I perswade meselfe he loues
you. I hope my brother is not for lord Straford. I hard my lord
Straford layed some of his actions to his charge; but I hope, if
he did, my brother has cleered himself. 
   I am glad my cosen St. Jhons is to be maried. I beleeue it is
for her aduantage; tho in my opinion, when one has chillderen,
it is better to be a widowe. 
   M=r= Ballam is very sicke; I thinke it is an ague, but he
eates, and so make his fits violent; he will take nothinge of
Wodowes, nor Morgan, but is resouled to send to morrow for
doctor Rwit, but he feares he will stay longer with him then 3
(^l.^) will hoold out; that he is willing to giue, but he can
spare no more, as he says: this 2 dayes he has bine debating of,
as they tell me; but now in his fitte, he resoulfes to send for
him, and dous not recken the charges. I hope he will doo well;
he is so prouedent. Your brother Tome had a sharpe fitte on
saboth day night, but I thanke God his last fite was but short;
he is very cheerefull and hungry, but I suffer him to eate
<P 118>
no meate, and I giue him glisters, which I thanke God has doun
him much good. 
   I hope in good time your father will finde a chamber in the
Tempell for you. Deare Ned, put your father in minde, to inquire
of M=r= Gwine. 
   I thanke you for your letter by the carrier; your letters
gives me more satisfaction then any other. I did much feare, by
what I was abell to gees, that the Scots declaration would giue
the contrary party ocation to sheaw themselfes; but I blles the
Lord, that He has ouer-ruled the harts of men, and I hope they
goo now on well, to doo that greate worke they haue in hand. I
thanke you for the paper the Scots put into the Lords. I haue
taken a coppy, and heare-inclosed returned yours. I confes, I
longe to heare the sugsess of the conferance. Many rumors are in
the cuntry. If you haue bine to heare the Scots minesters, send
me word how you like them. I am glad your father has not taken
coold, this coold weather; for wheare your fathers loodging is,
is the cooldest place I thinke about Loundoun. I reioyce that
your father is well, tho I was sorry I had no letter from him;
but when he is so biussy I would not haue him rwit. 
   I thanke God your brother Tomas scaped his ague yesterday,
and he is indeferent well. M=r= Ballam is ill, and so is Same
Pinner. Deare Ned, send me word when you thinke that M=r= Gower
can come doune. 
   I haue rwit to Sanky about Hacklet; for I perseaufe shee may
be brought to loue him. I haue keep my beed this weake, and as
yet I haue not bine a whoole day vp. I pray God blles you, and
giue you gras and comfort, the portion of His chillderen; so I
rest, 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Mar: 12, 1640. Bromton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 121>
[} [\CVI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - That I haue no letter from you this weake puts me
to a stand, and I should be very much trubeled, but that your
father rwites me word you are well, which mercy, I hope, the
Lord will still continue to you. I neuer more longed to heare
how things goo then I did this weake. Many rumors we heare, but
I biuld vpon nothing tell I heare it from you or your father. 
   I much desire to heare how the parlament tooke the ansure of
the justices of this country, that sent word they knwe not by
what aughtority the parlament did require the taking of the
protestation. S=r= William Croft is much against the parlament,
and vtters his minde freely: he was much displeased that they
would petition the Parlament: he toold M=r= Gower he was a
moufer of sedistion; and my cosen Tomkins was very hoot with
him: they say the parlament dous theare owne biusness, and not
the cuntryes. I shall long to heare from you. I thanke God, your
cosen Smith has loost his ague, for I could not deserne he had
any fite. On munday before Ester, M=r= Kirll and some other
gentellmen intend to seet forward with the petition, which I
hope will be well taken.
   I pray God blles you, and keepe you in His feare. 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Mar: 25, 1641.^)

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 125>
[} [\CXII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - Tho your letter by the merser weare short, yet
it had a longe wellcome. I much desire to heare how my lord
Straford comes of; for I beleeue many thinges depend vpon it.
Once againe I thanke you for his charge, and M=r= Fines his
speach, which I like very well. I need not tell you I had no
letter from you by the carrier, but your father rwit me word you
weare heareing my lord Strayfords charg, which was excuse
susphicient; and that you weare well, was pleasing to me, tho I
should haue bine glad of a letter. Your brother Tom, I thanke
God, has loost his ague, but he dous not yet come abroode. Your
brother Robine has is ague, but his fittes are short and much
eassier then they weare. M=r= Ballam is very ill; his is a
feauor, if it be no thinge elles. The other day he resouled to
make his will, and then to meddell no more with the world; but
yesterday and to day he hopes better of himself. I am very sorry
for him. Doctor Rwit, I thinke, will be with him on munday next,
and then I purpos, if pleas God, to take something meself. Aske
your father, wheather I shall send to Oxford for your beed and
Gorgess and the sheets; I can hardly spare the beeds; for it may
be, some will perswade that it is better sell them theare then
bringe them home; but I am not 
<P 126>
of that minde. Your sisters are well, and I should be very glad
to haue Brill goo to my lady Veeres. I hope M=r= Gower will come
downe shortly. I am much pleased that you are now with your
father, and I hope it will be much aduantage to you; and I
beceach the Lord to blles all the wayes of knowledg to you; for
you now see the truth of Gods word, that tho men spread like a
bay tree, yet they endure but for a time. 
   Deare Ned, be carefull of your self; and I beceach the Lord
to blles you: so I rest, 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Apr: 19, 1641. Bromton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 128>
[} [\CXV.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - Sence my thoughtes are so much with you, I may
easely writ offten to you. I take much content that I may hope
to see your father and you within 2 months. I pray God giue me a
comfortabell inioyeing of that my desire. Deare Ned, be carefull
of your health, and aboue all, of keeping your hart cloos with
your God. I did much reioyce that theare was hopes of a good
agreement betwene the 2 howess, and I hope to heare more fully
of it by Looker, who was looked for hard the last night; but he
is not yet come. Your brother Tom, I thanke God, is so well that
he comes into my chamber, and is mightyly a hungery, but your
brother Robine has his ague still; his fittes are much lees. He
was very ill, and I preuailed with him to take a vomit, which,
he says now, if he had not taken he thinkes he had bine in his
graue: but he was very vnwilling to take any more phiseke, so he
did not: and I feare he is a littell corbuticall; for his teethe
are loose; and I feare he had a littell touch of his old deases
the other day, but he had no fitt: he is alltogeather against
phiseke; he thinks an ague must be worne away by gooing abroode;
but theas are not such agues. Mr. Ballam mends a paece, and so
dous Sam Piner: your sisters are, I thanke God, very well, and
your cosen Smith, whous only sorrow is, that I haue goot one to
teach scoole for Mr. Ballam. 
   Mr. Gower toold me of the death of my good brother Bray. I am
exceeding sorry for the loos of him; I hope my sister Wacke and
my brother are well, and my lady Conway and my brothers
chillderen.
   I pray God blles you and keepe you in His feare: so I rest,
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^May 7, 1641. Bromton Castell.^)
   I thanke God, I finde meself much better for my phisek and
being 
<P 129>
let blood. I haue bine to see your brother Robine, but I durst
not goo to-day, becaus I haue taken a great coold.

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 130>
[} [\CXVIII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - The shurenes of the carrier, tho he is slow,
makes me writ by him, tho I purpos and pleas God to write by the
mersser,
<P 131>
whoo goos towards Loundoun on munday. I am glad that justice is
excicuted on my lord Straford, whoo I thinke dyed like a
Senneca, but not like one that had tasted the mistery of
godlyness. My deare Ned, let theas exampels make you
experimentally wise in Gods word, which has set forth the
prosperity of the wicked to be but for a time; he flowreschess
but for a time in his life, nor in his death has peace; but the
godly has that continuall feast, the peace of a good contience,
and his end is peace, and his memory shall not rot. I thanke God
that I hard you weare well, for I haue bine in feare of it all
this weake. I thanke God your brothers and sisters are well. I
haue keepe my beed sence munday. Deare Ned, be carefull of your
self, and I pray God blles you. So I rest,
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^May 21, 1641. Bromton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 134>
[} [\CXXII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - I cannot let doctor Deodat goo, without leting
you know my thoughts are much with you, and I hope I shall see
you shortly. I receued your letter by Mr. Griffits: it brought
me wellcome nwes, in that it asshured me of your health, which I
pray God continue to you. I thanke God your brothers and sisters
are well. I am still in beed, but I hope I shall be abell to
rise with in thease feawe days. I am sorry doctor Deodat has
left the cuntry. 
   Deare Ned, be carefull of your self for my sake. I pray God
bells you and giue you a comfortabell meeting with 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^June 14, 1641. Bromton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 136>
[} [\CXXIV.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - M=r= Doughty his stay something affter my cosin
Dauis, giues me leaue to begine this weake with a letter to you.
I pray God blles you and presarue you from all things that may
hurt you eather within or without. 
   I hard this morning that your father had taken my cosin
Wigmors estate into his hand, and vndertaken to pay all his
deets. I hope it is not true: send me word wheather you heare
any such thing. I would haue write to your father, but I thinke
many letters would trubell him: be carefull of yourself for my
sake. 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^June: 21, 1641. Bromton Castell.^)
   Just nowe M=r= Ballam tell me he is not abell to teach
scoule. I pray you tell your father so.

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 139>
[} [\CXXVII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE M=R= EDWARD HARLEY, AT S=R= ROBERT HARLEY,
LOUDGING AT M=R= GAY HIS HOWES, WOOLSTAPLE, IN WESMESTER.}]
   Deare Ned - Let theas lines tell you I am glad of all
opertunitys by which you may be ashured my thoughts are with
you. I hope it will not be longe before I haue the comfort of
seeing your father and you, tho when I consider the biusness the
parlament is in hand with, I then feare it will be longe. I pray
God blless you, and giue you such a true knowledg of the thinges
heare below, that you may know them to be but transetory. Your
brothers and sisters are well, and I pray God keepe you so.
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^July 3, 1641. Brompton Castell.^)
   Piner forgot to seet doune Edward Dallys rent in the rent
rolle, thearfore he has now sent it: for the rest of the tenants
of Kingsland, he says he can make no rent role. Giue this note
to your father. 

<Q HAR 1641 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 142>
[} [\CXXX.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, AT S=R= ROBERT HARLEY
HIS LOUDGING IN WESMESTER.}]
   Deare Ned - I heare M=r= Moore is come downe. I long to heare
from him, how your father and you doo. I pray God I may heare
well of you, and that I may see your father and you with
comfort. If the howes will site still, yet I hope your father
will come down for a littell time. I thanke God I was yesterday
at chruch, in the morning, but the affternoune was so weet I
durst not goo, and I thanke God I finde myselfe reasnabell well
to day. Your brothers are well at Clanuer, and your sisters are
well. I pray God blles you, as I desire my owne soule should be
bllesed. So I rest, 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^July 26, 1641. Bromton Castell.^)
   When you see my brother, tell him I present my saruis to him.

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 146>
[} [\CXXXVI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I did the last night, with much contentment,
receaue your letter by Jhon Coolborn. I take it for a greate
bllesing that you came so well to Loundoun, and that you meet
with so good newes theare, as that the bischops are voted in
both howes to lous theaire vots theare. I hope the Lord will
perfect His owne glorious worke. You know how your fathers
biusnes is neglected; and, alas! it is not speaking will sarue
turne, wheare theare
<P 147>
is not abilltise to doo other ways; thearefore I could wisch,
that your father had one of more vnderstanding to intrust, to
looke to, if his rents are not payed, and I thinke it will be
so. I could desire, if your father thought well of it, that M=r=
Tomas Moore weare instrusted with it; he knowes your fathers
estate, and is an honnest man, and not giuen to greate expences,
and thearefore I thinke he would goo the most fruegually way. I
knowe it would be some charges to haue him and his wife in the
howes; but I thinke it would quite the chargess. I should be
loth to haue a stranger, nowe your father is away. Deare Ned,
tell your father what I haue rwiten to you, and I pray God
derect him in his resolutions; and what he resoulues of, I shall
be contened with; so doo not forget to tell your father. I did
not rwite him word of it, becaus I would not make my letter so
longe to him, and I am not very well at this time; being ill, as
I vse to be. I haue, by this carrier, sent vp your rwiteing
boox, and your boox of bookes. I pray God blles you, and beleeue
you are most deare to,
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
   I thanke God my coold is goone. 
(^Pheb: 11, 1641. Bromton Castele.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 149>
[} [\CXXXIX.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - You desarue many thankes for your letters to
me this weeke, which was exceeding wellcome to me, both for the
good newes they contained, and becaus they came from you, whoo I
mise; for I may booldly say, I haue not bine very merry sence
you went. To me, theas mercys of God are such, as may make our
harts stand amased at the goodnes of our God, and they are
strong bands to tye vs in obedience to our God; for howe can we
sinn against so gracious, so mercifull a God, whoo is thus
pleased to put forth His wisdome and power, for the healp of His
poore chillderen. 
   I am exceeding glad that S=r= Jhon Conyars is leftenant of
the tower. I hope you are acquainted with him, and I hope you
haue deleuered my letter to my brother. They are now aboute a
petecion to the parlament, which I hope will be ready to send vp
the next weake. My deare Ned, the Lord of heauen blles you and
presarue you from all euill. Put your father in minde to be
carefull of himself; and I desire to know wheather he likes the
meath, and wheather my brother had the pyes I sent him. We heare
of letters that weare intersepted from my lord Digbe. I desire
to know wheather theare was any such thing or no. My deare Ned,
still beleeue I am beest pleased, when I can expres meself to
be,
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Pheb: 19, 1641. Brompton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 152>
[} [\CXLIII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   Deare Ned - I thanke you for your letter by Hall. I did much
long to receaue the declaration to the kinge. I thanke you for
it; I am sorry the kinge is pleased yet, not to conseaue anny
better thoughts of this parlament. The Lord be mercifull to this
poore land, and to this cuntry wheare I ame; for I thinke theare
is not such another. I heare the justices haue sent vp theare
ansure, why they would not take the protestation. S=r= William
Crof gouerns all of them. M=r= Braughton tells me you had taken
coold and weare not very well with it. I shall longe to heare
how you doo. Deare Ned, be carefull of yourselfe, and I pray God
blles you and presarue you in health. I am very well content
your father should take another, that his estate might be well
looked to, but I desire Piner may stay to receaue the mony, and
to lay it out. I thanke God, your cosen Smith is much better. I
will, if pleas God, prouid your linnes as soune as I can. I haue
by this carrier sent your father 12 pyes and a schees. M=r=
Braghton brought me no letter from you, which made me sorry; but
more sorry that you weare not well. I hope shortly you will have
the peticion for this county, but S=r= William Croft disswaded
it, as a thing vulawfull to petecion. So I rest, 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Mar: 19, 1641.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 154>
[} [\CXLVI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - You cannot conceaue how wellcome your letters
are to me; yet beleeue I give you thankes for them. I receued
one by the post and another by the carrier this weake. I see the
distance is still keepe betwne the kinge and parlament. The Lord
in mercy make them one, and in His good time incline the kinge
to be fully assured in the faithfull counsell of the parlament.
Our God has doun greate thinges, and I hope He will still
glorify Himselfe in exerciseing of His mercy to vs His poore
saruants. And, my deare Ned, it is my greate comfort that you
haue made your God your
<P 155>
confidence; and this is most sure, He will neuer faile you. I
purpos, and pleeas God, your sister Brill shall begine her
journey to Loundoun on munday next, and I hope shee will be
abell to reache Wickam by wensday night; wheare I hope shee
shall meete you at the Catterne wheele; shee much longes for
this journey. Piner and Hackelet and Prichard goo vp with her,
and M=r= Yeats and his wife. This night M=r= Old tells me that
M=r= Nweport is maried; for my Lady Nweport sent to Shrewsbury
to haue the bells rounge for it. I wishee, and please God, I had
the like ocation of reioyceing. Your cosen Smith is now well.
Doctor Wright stayed with him 3 or 4 dayes, and gaue him
somethinge, which has doun him much good. 
   I was ill when docter Wright was with your cosen Smith, and
so I haue bine sence he went; but I haue taken nothing of him
sence you went. 
   Deare Ned, be careful of yourselfe, and I beceach the Lord in
much mercy to blles you whith all His bllessings, and I wisch
you much ioye in your nwe lodging in Lincons Ine. I beleeue your
father misess you, and I am sure I doo. I pray you send me word
how you like your commons; so I rest,
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Apr: 29, 1642, Brompton Castell.^)
   M=r= Gower is very well pleased that he is chosen on of the
ministers.

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 157>
[} [\CXLIX.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - Your letter by the post and by the carrier are
both very wellcome to me; for besides the knowledge you giue me
of the publicke affaires, the assurance of your health is very
deare to me. We all are ingaged deepely to pray ernestly to our
God, that He will giue both wisdome and corage to the parlament,
and I hope the Lord will so giude them that the mouths of thos
that would speake euill of them shall be stoped. I thanke you
for desireing me not to beleeue rumors. I doo not; becaus I
assure meself I shall heare the truth of thinges from your penn.
It is the Lords greate worke, that
<P 158>
is now a frameing, and I am confident, it will be finisched with
much beauty, so that the very enimyes shall be enforsed to
acknowledg it has bine the Lord that has rought for His caus and
chillderen; against home they will finde that theare is no
deuination nor inchantment. 
   We hard that the Kenttiche peticion was brought by 3000 men,
and that 3000 Loundoners meete them vpon Blacke Heath and theare
fought, and many weare killed. And now we heare that S=r=
Francis Wortly drwe his sword and asked whoo was for the king,
and so 18 foolowed him. I thinke this later may be true; but for
the fight vpon Black Heath, I know it is not true. 
   I am glad our Heariford peticion is come to Loundoun, and I
hope deliuered before this: your sister, I hope, meet you at
Wickcam on wensday last. Deare Ned, send me word how my ladey
Veere vsess her, and how shee carriers herself. 
   I pray God blles you with a large measure of gras and with
all the comforts of this life. 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley. 
(^May 6, 1642.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 162>
[} [\CLV.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, THEAS LOUNDOUN.}]
   My deare Ned - The ocation of this letter is to let you knowe
that Mr. Weafer is dead. Doctor Wright has exprest a very greate
deale of frindeshipe to you in this biusnes, more then this
short time will let me tell you. This mornig doctor Wright came
to me presently affter 7 a cloke; he thinkes that if your father
can make Mr. Seaborne ferme to him, and gaine Mr. Ellton to
preueale with yonge Mr. Weafer, that you will haue it. I will,
in the meane time, rwite to Mr. Ellton, and doctor Wright will
carry the letter to him. But this is the question, that you must
be a burges of theare towne, which I bide Mr. Davis tell them
you would: but it seemes he did not so cleerely; for that was
one reson that made doctor Wright come to me, to let me knowe,
that if you weare not burges, you could not be one. Doctor
Wright is so ernest that you should haue this, that he perswaded
me to send to your father, that nothing might be left vndone. If
your father be displeased that I send so to him, you must healp
to make my excuse. If please God, I should be very glad you
might be in this imployment. The Lord prosper our indeuors and
blles you. In great hast,
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley. 
   Samuell promises me to be with you on saterday . . I pray you
rwit doctor Wright thankes, and pray your father to doo so. I
did not tell now thinke he had borne so much good will to
Brompton, as I see he dous.
(^May 19, 1642.^) 
   Deare Ned, put your father in minde, if he thinkes best to
doo so, to rwite to S=r= William Croft for his healpe.

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 165>
[} [\CLVIII. TO HER SON EDWARD.\] }]
   My deare Ned - I must tell you once againe, that I haue had
no letter from you this weake, but Sankey rwites me word that
you are well, and that makes me glad. I should haue bine very
glad to haue receaued derections from your father, wheather I
should doo any more in getting voices for you about Heariford. I
haue spoken to many who haue promised me, and young M=r= Weafer,
if hee doo not stand for it himself.
   If Mr. Ellton is nowe in London, I pray you tell your father,
that if it pleas him, he may speake to him. If you did rwite any
letter by the post, he has played the naughty fellow, and then I
pray you rwite no more by him. I pray God blles you, and giue
you a most comfortabell meeting with
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^May 27, 1642: Brompton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 166>
[} [\CLXI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - Now I thanke you for your letter by M=r=
Braughton, whoo brought it this day somethinge late, so that I
am shortned in time to rwite to you. 
   I thinke we must all acknowledeg Gods greate mercy that the
plot for the takeing of Hull was discouered. I pray God derect
the parlement what they ought to doo, for they haue enimyes
enough to looke with on euill eye at what theare actions.
<P 167>
   At Loudlow they seet vp a May pole, and a thinge like a head
vpon it, and so they did at Croft, and gathered a greate many
about it, and shot at it in deristion of roundheads. At Loudlow
they abused M=r= Bauges sonne very much, and are so insolent
that they durst not leaue theare howes to come to the fast. I
acknowledg I doo not thinke meself safe wheare I am. I loos the
comfort of your fathers company, and am in but littell safety,
but that my trust is in God; and what is doun in your fathers
estate pleasess him not, so that I wisch meselfe, with all my
hart, at Loundoun, and then your father might be a wittnes of
what is spent; but if your father thinke it beest for me to be
in the cuntry, I am every well pleased with what he shall thinke
beest. I haue sent you by this carryer, in a box, 3 shirts;
theare is another, but it was not quite made; on of them is not
wasched; I will, and pleas God, send you another the next weake,
and some handchersher. I rwite yesterday to you by the post of
Loudlow, how my thankes was taken at Heariford. 
   I pray God blles you and keepe you from sinn, and from all
other euills, and giue you a joyfull meeting with
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
   Your sister Doll is not well, shee has a great weakenes vpon
her; yet I thanke God this day shee is somethinge better than
shee was.
(^June 4, 1642: Brompton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 171>
[} [\CLXVI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - Your two letters this weake weare exceeding
wellcome to me. I thanke God, that you finde yourselfe better
affter your pihiseke. Deare Ned, for my sake take care of 
your - .
<P 172>
   I am very glad to heare that your sister has so much fauor
from my lady Veere. I had no letter from your sister this weake.
I hope the horsess are come well to your father: and by this
carrier I purpos, and pleas God, to send the 2 pistolls you
rwite me word your father would haue, and the gillt plate which
he has sent for. I am exceeding glad to heare that my lord of
Sallsbery and my lord of Clare is come to the parlement. It is a
greate comfort to me to see you fixe your thoughts in theas
times vpon your God. Your brother Tom has bine extreme ill, and
it pleased God, that docter Wright was with M=rs= Litellton, and
so came to see me as he went home, which I thought fell out
happily for your brother. Yesterday I was exceeding fraid of
him, but this day, I thanke God, he is better, so that I hope
docter Wright may leaue him to-morrow. He fell sike on tusday
last; so that, deare Ned, I finde that on trubele foolows
another. 
   M=r= William Littellton being at Loudlow last weake, as he
came out of the chruch, a man came to him and looked him in the
fase and cryed "roundhead;" he gaue the fellow a good box of the
eare and steep to on that had a chugell and tooke it from him
and beat him soundly. They say, they are now more quiet in
Loudlow. I pray you put your father in mind to consider of that
I rwite to him about M=r= Yates, and send me word what he says,
for I desire they may be punisched.
   I pray God blles you and giue you a comfortabell meeting with
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Jne: 24, 1642. Brompton Castell.^)
   Deare Ned, send me word wheather my lady Veere giues any
thinge in this prouicione for raizing of hors for the good of
this poore kingdome.

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 174>
[} [\CLXX.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I hard very late this night that M=r= Moore
would goo to Loundoun, and I cannot let him pas without a
letter; for, my deare Ned, beleeue me, I long to see, and how
glad should I be, if you weare heare at the fast. Docter Wright
was send for to M=r= James, whoo was very ill, and he, seeing
M=r= Moore with him, toold
<P 175>
me he was to goo to Loundoun: but it was late, and if I doo not
send very early, he will be goon; so that I can say no more but
that I am,
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Jun: 27, 1642.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 176>
[} [\CLXXIII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I receued your letter by Mr. Hill yesterday,
and I thanke God that I heare you are well; the Lord in mercy
continue that comfort to me. 
   They goo on with the milica in this cuntry; the sherafe has
sent out warents that they apeare on the 15 of this month at
Herifrd. Your fathers company, I heare, they meane to make offer
to you, and if you will not haue it, they will giue it to
another. They trihumfe brafely, as they say, and threaten poore
Brompton; but
<P 177>
we are in the hand of our God, whoo I hope will keepe vs safe. I
pray God blles you, as I desire the soule should be bllesed, of
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^July 8, 1642.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 180>
[} [\CLXXVII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I longe to see you, but would not haue you
come downe, for I cannot thinke this cuntry very safe; by the
papers I haue sent to your father, you will knowe the temper of
it. I hope your father will giue me full derections how I may
beest haue my howes gareded, if need be; if he will giue the
derections, I hope, I shall foolow it. 
   My deare Ned, I thanke God I am not afraide. It is the Lords
caus that we haue stood for, and I trust, though our iniquitys
testify aganst vs, yet the Lord will worke for His owne name
sake, and that He will now sheawe the men of the world that it
is hard fighting against heauen. And for our comforts, I thinke
neuer any laide plots to route out all Gods chillderen at once,
but that the
<P 181>
Lord did sheawe Himselfe mighty in saveing His saruants and
confounding His enimyes, as He did Pharowe, when he thought to
haue destroyed all Israell, and so Haman. Nowe, the intention
is, to route out all that feare God, and surely the Lord will
arise to healpe vs: and in your God let your confidence be, and
I am assured it is so. One meet Samuell and not knoweing wheare
he dwelt, Samuell toold him he was a Darbesheare man, and that
he came lately from thence, and so he did in discours; the papis
toold him, that theare was but a feawe puretaines in this
cuntry, and 40 men would cut them all off. 
   Had I not had this ocation to send to your father, yet I had
sent this boy vp to Loundoun; he is such a rogeisch boy that I
dare not keepe him in my howes, and as littell do I dare to let
him goo in this cuntry, least he ioyne with the company of
vollentirs, or some other such crwe. I haue giuen him no more
money then will sarue to beare his charges vpe; and becaus I
would haue him make hast and be sure to goo to Loundoun, I haue
toold him, that you will giue him something for his paines, if
he come to you in good time and doo not loyter; and heare
inlosed I haue sent you halfe a crowne. Giue him what you thinke
fitte, and I desire he may not come downe any more, but that he
may be perswaded to goo to seae, or some other imployment. He
thinkes he shall come downe againe. Good Ned, do not tell
Martaine that I send him vp with such an intention. I haue
derected theas letters to you, and I send him to you, becaus I
would not haue the cuntry take notis, that I send to your father
so offten; but when such ocations come, I must needs send to
him, for I can rely vpon nobodys counsell but his. I pray God
blles you and presarue you in safety, and the Lord in mercy giue
you a comfortabell meeting with
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^July 19, 1642. Brompton Castell.^)
   My cosen Dauis tells me that none can make shot but thos
whous trade it is, so I haue made the plumer rwite to Woster for
50 waight
<P 182>
of shot. I sent to Woster, becaus I would not haue it knowne. If
your father thinke that is not enoufg, I will send for more. I
pray you tell your father that my cosen Robert Croft is in the
cuntry. My cosen Tomkins is as violent as euer, and many thinke
that her very words, is in the Heariford resolutions. I beleeue
it was M=r= Masons pening. He is gone to Yorke, for when he
carried the letter from the gentellmen in this cuntry, he was
made the kings chapline.

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 183>
[} [\CLXXX.\] }] 
[}FOR MY MUCH HONNORED FRINDE MRS. WALLCOTE, AT WALLCOTE.}]
   Most worthy frinde - I had rather intreate a kindenes from
you then from any I knowe; assureing meselfe you will doo the
same to me, in home you have as much interest in, as in any.
<P 184>
   I haue had of late in the mending of the leeds of my howes
bine inforsed to lay out an extriordary some of money; and
Edward Dally with others, oweing me rent, I can not as yet geet
it; if you can lend me 40 (^l.^) for halfe or a quarter of a
yeare, I shall take it as a greate kindenes, and I will pay the
interest of it with all my hart, and giue you any securety my
sonne and I can giue you, which I hope will be enough for a
greater some. So recommending you unto the protection of God, I
rest,
   Your most affectinat frinde, Brilliana Harley.
(^Augs. 18, 1642.^)
   I desire to haue my saruis presented to M=r= Wallcote and
your sonne.

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 184>
[} [\CLXXXI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY MUCH HONNORED FRINDE MRS. WALLCOTE, AT WALLCOTE.}]
   My much honnored and deare frinde, - I acknowledg this as a
greate fauor, and I shall be ready to expres my thankes with all
the 
<P 185>
testimony of true respets, and I acknowledge, that for the
vertues you haue, I much loue and honnor you. I haue receued the
20 (^l.^) you are pleased to lend me, and I haue made a bill of
the resaite of it, and my sonne and meselfe haue put our hands
to the resaite of it, and I will and pleas God pay you very
shortly. 
   I desire to haue my saruis presented to M=r= Wallcote and
your sonne; and desire you to beleeue that I am most vnfainedly 
   Your most affectinat frinde, Brilliana Harley.
(^Augt: 22, 1642. Brompton Castell.^)

<Q HAR 1642 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 186>
[} [\CLXXXIII. TO HER SON EDWARD.\] }] 
   My deare Ned - I thanke you for your letter by Proser; he is
a trusty mesenger. I must now tell you how gratious our God has
bine to vs: on the soboth day affter I receued the letter from
the markis, we sett that day apart to sceeke to our God, and
then on munday we prepared for a seege; but our good God called
them another way; and the markis sent me word he remembered him
to me, and that I need not feare him, for he was gooing away,
but bide me feare him that came affter him.
   M=r= Connisbe is the gouernor of Heariford, and he sent to me
a letter by M=r= Wigmore. I did not let him come into my howes,
but I went into the garden to him. Your father will sheawe you
the letter; they are in a mighty violence against me; they
reueng all that was doune vpon me, so that I shall feare any
more parlament forsess comeing into this cuntry: and deare Ned,
when it is in your power sheaw kindenes to them, for they must
be overcome so. Bardlam has played the very traitor to me, and
Richard Bytheway neuer comes at me: M=r= Phillips takes much
care and pains. Deare Ned, rwite him thankes tho it be but in a
littell scripe of paper. My deare Ned, I pray you aduis with
your father wheather he thinkes it best that I should put away
most of the men that are in
<P 187>
my howes, and wheather it be best for me to goo from Brompton,
or by Gods healp to stand it out. I will be willing to doo what
he would have me doo. I neuer was in such sorrows, as I haue
bine sence you left me; but I hope the Lord will deleuer me; but
they are most cruely beent against me. I thanke you for your
counsell, not to take theair words; the Lord in mercy presarue
you, and if it be His holy will, giue me the comfort of seeing
you, in home is much of the comfort of 
   Your affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Desem: 25, 1642.^)

<Q HAR 1643 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 189>
[} [\CLXXXVII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I rwite to you the other day by M=r= Taylor,
and I am as glad to doo it now, and I hope this will come safe
to your hand.
   I am in the same condistion as I was; still amongst my
enimys, who now threeten me not with forsess, becaus the
soulders are goon before Gloster; theaire randevous is S=r= Ro.
Cookes howes. My deare
<P 190>
Ned, desire your father to send me word what he thinkes I had
beest doo; for if I should put away the men in my howes, I
should be eury day plundered, and as basely vsed as it is
poscibell, and I can receaue no rents. 
   Sam Piner toold who went with you, and so Leeg and Poell are
indited. 
   M=r= Yaets and M=r= Lowe and Edward Pin. goo towards Loundoun
the next weake. Edward Pin. biusnes is to speake with your
father aboute the legacy he should pay M=r= Poells daughter; he
has sould land to her husband, and he would haue him take the
mony of your father. I would not haue had him goo vp to
Loundoun, becaus I thinke it is not a time for your father to
take vp mony to pay that legacy, that the land is still in
question; but your brother tells me Piners intentiene is to geet
more lives on Buckton for that mony. If your father pleas to
consider it, I thinke it is not so much for his profit to let on
man haue so many liueings in his hand; for then they put poore
tenants into them, and let the howses goo downe, and your father
has but on tenant, for his tenant haueing 2 or 3. I pray you
speake to your father about it. Good M=r= Bayley is come to me.
They rage more then euer. I pray God keepe vs from them; and,
deare Ned, pray for vs and desire all good Christians to doo so.
The Lord in mercy blles you, and giue me, a comfortabell seeing
of you, who hoold you as deare as my owne soule.
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
   I longe to see your sister Brills sonn. 
   I think it seuen yeare tell he come.
   I sent you all your linnens the last saterday. 
   M=r= William Griffits tooke them with him, and promised to
send them to his brother Gorge. 
   I purpos to send your man vp to you, when Piner goos, for I
beleeue you will hardly haue on that is better and loues you
more.
(^Feb. 25, 1642.^)

<Q HAR 1643 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 195>
[} [\CXCI.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I should haue bine very glad to haue receued a
letter from you by Mr. Taylor; and deare Ned, finde some way or
other to rwite to me that I may know how the world goos, and how
it is with your father and yourselfe; for it is a death to be
amoungst my enimys, and not to heare from thos I loue so
dearely.
   Heare I haue sent you a coppy of the sommons was sent me; I
wisch with all my hart that euery on would take notice what way
they take: that if I doo not giue them my howes, and what they
would haue, I shall be proseeded against as a trator. It may be
euery onse case to be made traytors; for I beleeue eury on will
be as vnwilling to part with theare howes as I am. I desire your
father would seariously thinke what I had beest doo; wheather
stay at Brompton, or remoue to some other place. I heare theare
are 600 soulders apointed to come against me. I know not
wheather this sessation of armes will stay them. I cannot tell
what to think, that I heare nothing of your sister Brills sonne,
nor that you did not write me word, that he was come to you. I
heare captaine Jeferes is drowned. I am very much behoolding to
docter Wright, for he will not goo from Brompton tell he sees me
out of my trubell. 
   Mr. Phillips carrys himselfe very well, and Mr. H [^GAP IN
EDITION^] as he was vsed to doo. Good M=r= Baughly is faine to
come to Brompton.
<P 196>
M=r= Legg is still at Brompton, and Mathes and the Wellchmen and
Staney and 2 of Knights brothers, who were faine to fly out of
theare owne cuntry. My deare Ned, I will promise meselfe a
letter from you by this bearer, whoo has carried himselfe very
well to me; thearefore I pray you giue him thankes for it. I
pray God blles you, and in His good time giue vs a joyfull
meeting, which I beleeue you thinke is longed for, by
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley. 
   I heare they have put vp proclamations in this cuntry, that
theare shall be no sessation of armes.
   Docter Wright and M=rs= Wright remember saruis to you.
(^Mar: 8, 1642.^)

<Q HAR 1643 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 197>
[} [\CXCIII.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I was very glad to receaue a letter from you
by Proser and by Samleman, but I did hope you would haue bine
more at large, for I doo exceedingly long to heare what you doo,
and
<P 198>
what is beest for me to doo. I heare some say, you haue an
imployment, but I will beleeue nothing tell I heare it from your
selfe or father. The report in this cuntry is, that my lord
Capell comes very shortly to be gowernor of Shrewsbury, and the
qu: is to come to Loudlow. I thanke God we are all at Brompton,
and desire to knowe when you meane, and pleas God, to moue this
way.
   I pray God blles you and giue you a comfortabell meeting with
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
   Doctor Wright and M=rs= Wright, whoo yet make me so much
behoolding to them as that they are with me, remember theaire
saruis to you.
(^Mar: 25, 1643.^)

<Q HAR 1643 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 203>
[} [\CXCIX.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - I hard from Loundoun that you with S=r= Arter
Hasellrike left Loundoun on Friday was senight, and that your
intentions weare to hast to S=r= William Waller. I haue some
hope that theas lines may meet with you, which if they doo, my
deare Ned, let them assure you my hart is with you; and I hope
my God will blles you. This bearer can tell you the state of
Hearifordschere. You know you are the comfort of my life,
thearefore thinke it not strange, if my thoughts are so much
with you. 
   The Lord in much mercy blles and presarue you, and giue you a
comfortabell meeting with
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^June 19, 1643.^)
   I thanke God we are all well at Brompton.

<Q HAR 1643 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 204>
[} [\CCI. TO HER SON EDWARD.\] }] 
   My deare Ned - On saterday I receued your letter by Raphe.
Your being well is mine, and thearefore you may beleeue I
reioyce in it. That you left me with sorrow, when you went last
from Brompton, I beleeue; for I thinke, with comfort I thinke of
it, that you are not only a child, but on with child-like
affections to me, and I knowe you haue so much vnderstanding
that you did well way the condistion I was in; but I beleeue it,
your leaueing of me was more sorrow then my condistion could be;
but I hope the Lord will in mercy giue you to me again, for you
are both a Joseph and a Beniamin
<P 205>
to me, and deare Ned, longe to see me; and I hope when you haue
spent some littell time in the army you will come to Brompton.
Sence you desired your brother to come to you, I could not deny
it, though I was loth to leaue him. I hope he is come, before
this, safe to you; and I pray God blles you both togeather, and
that I may agene haue you returne in safety with your deare
father. In this cuntry they begine to rais nwe tropes, and they
haue seast the country at 1200 (^l.^) a-month. My lo. Harbert
and colonel Vaueser whoo is to be gouerner of Heariford, is gone
vp into Moungomeryscheere to rais soulders. All of them are
returned into Hearifordsheere; S=r= Wallter Pye, M=r= Brabson,
M=r= Smaleman, M=r= Wigmore, M=r= Ligen, and M=r= Stiles and
Gardnas, whoo has quartered soulders in Kingsland, and they say,
that besides the 1200 (^l.^) a month, theare must be free
quarter for soulders. They counsell, but the Lord in mercy
defeate theaire counsells. I must looke for nwe one-seets, but I
hope I shall looke to my rocke of defence, the Lord my God, from
home is deleuerance. Out of Chescheere, I heare from a sure
hand, that on the 19 of this month S=r= William Brerton sent out
a party of hors into Sharpschere, but when they weare plundering
at Hanmere, the lo. Capells tropes supprised them; they hasted
to theaire horsess and fleed, but theare was taken prisnors of
them the leftenan colonell and captain leftenant Sanky, and 13
more taken prisners, and about 12 slaine, and many more wounded.
They vsed the prisnors very barborously. All Lancascheere is
cleered, only Latham howes. My lord of Darby has left that
county, which they take ill. My deare Ned, I know you loue to
heare how I doo. I thanke God, beyond my expectation or that of
some in my howes, my prouistions has heald out; and I haue
borrowed yet not much mony, though my tenants will not pay me,
and Coolborn deales very ill with me, and will pay me no mony;
and M=r= Connisbys steward sent to him to know wheather he would
receaue the 6 coolts, and he neuer toold me of it, but sent them
word he durst not. This M=r= Eaton rwite me word of yesterday.
   Your brother can tell you I sent for a sargent to colonnell
Massey, 
<P 206>
and he sent me one, and I hope he will doo very well. As you
desired to haue some honnest man sent you, I did as much desire
to send you some. Those that I thought would haue gone gladly,
findes out excusess, but theas 3 desired to goo, to venture
theair liues with you, or elles they would not goo from me.
Doctor Write asked his man the question, but the poore gardner
and Stangy desired it of themselfes, and they seet forward with
good corage. I will endeuor to see wheather any will contribute
to buy a hors; but thos that haue harts haue not means, and they
that haue means haue not harts. I doo not send you Jack
Griffets, becaus I thought you might like Phillip Loouke, whoo
is a pretty inienious fellow, but if you would haue Griffets, I
pray you let me know by Raphe, and I will, if pleas God, send
him to you. By Raphe and the rest I haue sent you [^IN EDITION
yon^] your bookes. Deare Ned, I could say much more to you, but
I haue run out my paper. The Lord of Heauen blles you and
presarue you, and make you to doo worthely and to outliue all
theas trubells. 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^June 30, 1643.^)
   I am confident you will hate all plundering and
vnmercifullness. I pray you aske your brother what I bide him
tell you concerning M=r= Hill.

<Q HAR 1643 BHARLEY>
<A LADY BRILLIANA HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 208>
[} [\CCV.\] }] 
[}FOR MY DEARE SONNE COLONELL HARLEY.}]
   My deare Ned - Your short but wellcome letter I receaued by
Prosser, and as it has pleased God to intrust you with a greater
<P 209>
charge, as to change your trope into a regiment, so the Lord in
mercy blles you with a dubell measure of abillitys, and the Lord
of Hosts be your protector and make you victorious. My deare
Ned, how much I longe to see you I cannot expres, and if it be
possibell, in parte meete my desires in desireing, in some
measure as I doo, to see me; and if pleased the Lord, I wisch
you weare at Brompton. I am now againe threatned; there are some
souldiers come to Lemster and 3 troopes of hors to Heariford
with S=r= William Vauasor, and they say they meane to viset
Brompton againe; but I hope the Lord will deleuer me. My trust
is only in my God, whoo neuer yet failled me. 
   I pray you aske M=r= Kinge what I prayed him to tell you
conserning Wigmore. 
   I haue taken a very greate coold, which has made me very ill
thees 2 or 3 days, but I hope the Lord will be mercifull to me,
in giuing me my health, for it is an ill time to be sike in.
   My deare Ned, I pray God blles you and giue me the comfort of
seeing you, for you are the comfort of 
   Your most affectinat mother, Brilliana Harley.
(^Octo: 9, 1643.^)

<Q HAR 1639 RHARLEY>
<A ROBERT HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 211>
[}TO MR. EDWARD HARLEY, AT MAGDALEN HALL IN OXFORD.}]
   Ned Harley - Comend my service to M=r= provost and M=r=
Rouse, and lett them know that I do receeve it as an honor to
mee y=er= intentions to set up my armes in the colledge. I will
go (God willinge) send it to them.
   There is another seruice which I have impartid to your worthy
tutor, which if you like not, new counsailes shal be taken, for
I would willingly shew myself, as time shall trie, and truth
shall prove, and occasion shall rest contented, your obedient
father. But, if otherwise or so, the horses shal be with you on
Wednesday, the 11th of the next month, that you may be heere the
14th; and, if you have taken the schoolinge so farr as that you
have learned any rhetoricke, file your tong, and bestowe it all
on your tutor to p'suade hym to come along with you. In which
attempt if you faile, I may say you have spent your time and I
my money to small purpose, if your tutor hath not taught you to
overcome hym at his owne weapon. Howsoever, (\fac periculum\) ,
use your skill, and if you prevayle, send me word by the next,
and I will send a horse for the good tutor allso. The Lord in
mercy sett and settle His holy feare in your heart, then which
nothinge can more inlarge the joye of,
   Your most lov'ge father, Ro. Harley
(^Bro'pto: Castle,^) (\18mo 9bris\) , 1639.

<Q HAR 1639 RHARLEY>
<A ROBERT HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 212>
[}FOR MR. EDWARD HARLEY, AT MAGD: HALL, IN OXON.}] 
   Ned Harley - By my last I acquainted you of my purpose to
send horses for you and your worthy tutor, if your logicke or
rethoricke can prevayle with hym to honoure you heere with his
presence, and my resolution hereby (God will'ge) to send them
that they may arrive with you on the 11th of the next month. But
if the tutors affaires stand calculated for an other meridian in
the verticole point of this yeare, then let this berer, in his
returne from London, bring mee a cleere understonding of it, and
beseeche your good tutor to be the good genius for a
schoolmaster heere. Remember, you haue set saile for heaven: let
Ch: be your north starr, His holy word your card, and keepe your
canvase pregnant with His feare, and upon my life, you will make
a happy voyage. In which hope I joye and rest, 
   Your most affectionate father, Ro. Harley.
(^Bro'pto' Cast:^) (\25=t= 9bris\) , 1639.

<Q HAR 1641 RHARLEY>
<A ROBERT HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 212>
[}FOR MY SONNE MR. EDWARD HARLEY, AT BRO~PTO~ CASTLE.}] 
   Ned Harley - I canot advertise you any thinge of your
chamber, but I intend to provide one for you as soone as I can.
Whilst you are at Bro~pton lett no day pass (\sine linea\) .
Walke as an example in love before your brothers and sisters,
that they may honoure you next mee and your good mother. See the
worship of God kept up in the familye, greeve not your heavenly
Father by s-ge ag=st= Hym. So you wilbe the joye of your
earthly, 
   Ro. Harley.
   Comend my love to your brothers and sisters, and to your
cossin Smyth.
(^Little Brittan,^) (\18=mo= 8=bris=\) , 1641.

<Q HAR 1641 RHARLEY>
<A ROBERT HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 212>
[}FOR NED HARLEY.}] 
   Ned Harley - I thanke you for your lettre, which you will
understande I hope to be an incourage~t to write to mee. I am
sorry for the sad accident 
<P 213>
at Leyntwardine. It is fitt that Pyner should th=ke= how to
provide an other tenant for the mille, and let hym co~ferr with
Thos. Davyes of Wigmire abote the death of the man. 
   Divide my blessing betweene yourself and your brothers and
sisters, and, if you challenge a double parte, strive to walke
worthy of your title to it, which you can never do, unless you
feare all s-e, which the Lord in mercye settle in your heart,
that you may be the joye of your father,
   Ro. Harley.
   Com=d= me to your cossin Smyth.
(^London,^) (\30=o= 8bris\) , 1641.

<Q HAR 1643? MVERE>
<A MARY VERE>
<G F>
<P 213>
[} [\LADY VERE TO EDWARD HARLEY.\] }] 
   Good Nephew - I am very sory to hear by yo=r= sistars leter
of the weakn=s= in your arme. I am glad you ar in London, whear
you may have the meanes wich I pray God to bles to you, and m'k
vs to se the mercy in preserveing yo=r= life with this mark of
honor. I did writ latly to you about my sad busnis, it is lick
to be very burdensom to me, for I shall not know what to do, if
that plas faill me. My hope is in God, who will never fail them
that ar His. I know you will not be wanting in any thing wherein
you may be helpfull in the busines, wich I beleue you vnderstand
so well as to know what is to be done in it, and I know your
fathers love and care of me. I hear not it that my nephew Tracy
be come, and tell then I hear nothing can be don. God geve me a
good end of it, and menes to expres the senserity of my
affections, wich shall never faill in loveing and esteming you,
and in aproving myself,
   Yor most faithfull true loving avnt, Mary Vere.

<Q HAR 1651 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 216>
[} [\COL. HARLEY TO HIS BROTHER THOMAS.\] }] 
   Deare Brother - I have now exchanged the sweet country aire
and sports for the dirt, fogs, and trouble of the city. The
employment there, is to chase the poore hare, or crafty fox;
heere, to pursue one another. The forest whence I came, hath not
beasts more savage as we meete every day. The lustfull goat,
fawning dog, greedy wolf range freely, and what is worst, every
one abounds with these wild inhabitants, and want sagacity to
pursue and courage to destroy them. If every private person
would be an honest hunter, we should not complaine of so many
Nimrods. If you have recovered,
<P 217>
and can spare your (^watry hunter^) , I shall be very glad to
receave him from you. The assurance of your health will be very
wellcome to,
   Your most affectionate brother,
   Edw. Harley.
(^Westminster,^) (\6 Martii\) , 1650-1.
For his deare Brother,
   Mr. Thomas Harley.

<Q HAR 1654 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 217>
[} [\ED. HARLEY TO HIS FATHER.\] }] [^TO ROBERT HARLEY^]
   Sir - I trust the same mercy which conducted me safely hither
hath comfortably preserved you. If that confidence did not
refresh me, this journey would be very sad; but I dare not doubt
the tender compassions of our heavenly Father to you, because I
have alwaies experienced your tenderness to me. Thus, I beseech
you, give me leave according to our Lord and Saviors precious
logick to make some return for your fatherly love to me, with an
assurance of an infinite Fatherly love to you. Sir, if our Lord
God see it good to permitt Satan to discover his malice, be
pleased to consider that your age and weakness, which encourage
Satan to assault you: they doe much more assure you of victory,
because all the retrenchments from your own ability to resist,
doe place you more closely and imediately under the secure
protection of the Lord of Hosts, who I doubt not will graciously
avenge you of your spirituall adversary; will make His candle
shine upon your head, and having sanctified all His dispensatins
towards you, will fully assure you, that having given you His
son, how shall He not with Him also freely give you all things.
Thus humbly prayes he, who begs your blessing for, Sir,
   Your most obedient son, Edw. Harley.
(^Birmichem, Feb. 2, 1653-4.^)
   To his most honored father, Sir Robert Harley, Knt. of the
Bath, at Ludlow, present these.

<Q HAR 1654 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 218>
[} [\EDW. HARLEY TO HIS FATHER.\] }] [^TO ROBERT HARLEY^]
   Sir - I bless God for your letter and for the testimony of
His goodness to you, which I trust will be graceousily continued
and enlarged. I am not yet at a certainty whether I shall
procure the money by the security of an assignation of your
statute to the Earle of Lincolne, or by a new statute, but I
doubt not a speedy dispatch, through Gods goodness. Wednesday
last, the lord Protector rode in great state from Temple-bar to
Grocers Hall. The lord Mayor rode bare, with the sword before
him, and was knighted by him after the banquet, and the sword
the Protector did then weare, he bestowed upon the Mayor. The
Recorder his speech I present to you, enclosed. I beseeche the
Lord in mercy confirme your health, according to His abundant
mercy, which is the prayer of him, that humbly begs your
blessinge, and is,
   Sir,
   Your most obedient Son, 
   Edw. Harley.
(^London, Old Bayley, 11 Feb. 1653-4.^)
   For the Right Worshipfull Sir Robert Harley, Kt. of the
Bathe, at Ludlow, Shropshyre.

<Q HAR 1654 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 218>
[} [\EDWARD HARLEY, ON THE DAY OF HIS MARRIAGE, TO HIS FATHER.\]
}] [^TO ROBERT HARLEY^]
   Sir - Although I have not heard since I parted from Ludlow
concerning your health, I trust our gracious God continues your
health towards a further degree of confirmation and strength.
This day according to your leave, and by Gods mercy to me, I
have consumated this great affaire heere, and my dear heart and
I joyn in humbly begging your blessing. The most part of the
3000 (^l.^) will be in a fewe daies at London. 1500 (^l.^) of it
is for Mr. Sherwyn. I desire to know whether Mr. Lacy shall have
his money out of the remainder. My Lady Button is very desirous
to have the joynture immediately settled, which I doubt cannot
be wel-done before you speak with Mr. Powys, who is now on the
circuit; therefore if please you, I think you may give my lady
satisfaction for the present, if you acknowledg a statut of 8000
(^l.^) to my Lady Button, with a defesance 
<P 219>
that you will settle a joynture within three or six months of
500 (^l.^) per an. This may be done at Ludlow; and if you aprov
it, I beseech you that it may be speedily dispatched hither. I
think Mr. Davies of Wigmore can draw the defesance wel. My Lady
Button is very desirus of a letter from you. She presents her
service to you. When you think fit to writ of any privat
business, I think, Sir, it may be better, if you pleas, to mak
use of my sister Stanleys penn. Sir, I beseech the Lord in mercy
continue your health and enlarge all spiritual comforts to you.
So prayes, Sir,
   Your most obedient son,
   Edward Harley.
(^Tavistock, June 26, 1654.^)
   Sir - I beseech you y=t= our maryag may be kept privat. 
   To his most honored father, Sir Robert Harley, Kt. of the
Bathe, At Ludlow, present these.

<Q HAR 1654? MHARLEY>
<A MARY HARLEY>
<G F>
<P 219>
[} [\MARY HARLEY TO HER HUSBAND, COL. ED. HARLEY.\] }]
   Deare Heart - I was very ill on Saturday last, and not abrode
till to day. The duty as you desierid of the fast was this day
performed, and the other of prayer every second Thursday shall
be, if God pleas - it being your fathers command as well as
yours. Mr. Shilton tells me Hurse cannot have either of the
livings. I was forced to borrow money to paye Rutley 15 (^l.^)
12 (^s.^) ; and I must borrow sume and the rest in my gold must
pay Mr. Shiltons bill to Mr. Cloggie. The steward tells me none
will be had. I know not what to doe for the house. I believe I
must be forced to leve it, tho I should gladly do any service I
am able. I have given your directions concerning the church to
Mr. Davis, and to the steward for to bring hay, which he thinks,
as he tells me, very difficult alredy, and it will be
impossible, by that time he hath done plowing: so he would have
too of the coach horses sent to be kept at Brompton. My brother
came well home last Satturday, but the coach brook at Eacham,
and came not till yesterday. Sir Robert and all are well, but
your sad (and in your absence, deare heart,)
   Unhappie, Mary Harley.
(^Sep. 16^)
<P 220>
Pray write to my mother - my service to my brother, with my
prayers for his health. We prayed for his recovery, which we hop
will be sudaine. My brother presents his love to you. If you
write to my mother, and send the inclosed you'll doe a great
favour. My mother is grieved she heard not from me.

<Q HAR 1661 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 220>
[} [\SIR EDWARD HARLEY TO HIS BROTHER, ANNOUNCING THE BIRTH OF
HIS SON ROBERT, AFTERWARDS CREATED EARL OF OXFORD.\] }] [^TO
THOMAS HARLEY^]
   Deare Brother - I thanke God I can give you the notice of the
great mercy God hath pleased to vouchsafe us. Thursday, 5 Dec.
between 7 and 8 in the evening my wife was very well delivered
of a lusty boy, who was next day baptized and bears my fathers
name, and through mercy my brother was recovered to so much
strength as to be present. I desire you to joyn with us in
thankfulness for this great mercy. 
   I desire to be comended to Mr. Hawes. Sir H. Lingen came not
to town before this night. Monday morning, God willing, I shall
speak with him, and I hope secure both Mr. Hawes and some others
from further troubles. I hope you have received before this time
some letters I wrote since W. Reynolds coming up, who brought
all things safe. 
   I pray God bless the children, who I hope will be glad of
theyr new brother, for they shall be loved still ... 
peice ... leg and thigh. My sister is much better in health than
when she came up. I pray God be with you.
   I am your most affectinat brother, Edw. Harley.
(^Bow: Street, Dec: 7, 1661.^)
   [\DIRECTED\] - To the Worspl. Thomas Harley, Esq. at Bucknel.
   Leave this with Mr. Edward Robinson, bookseller, at Ludlow.

<Q HAR 1658 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 237>
[} [\(1.) LETTER FROM EDWARD HARLEY TO THE MASTER AND FELLOWS
OF CAIUS COLL. 14 DEC. 1658. EDWARD HARLEY TO THE REVEREND AND
WORTHY THE MASTER AND FELLOWES OF GONVIL AND CAIUS COLLEDG IN
CAMBRIDG - PRESENT THESE.\] }] 
   Reverend and Worthy - The leas of the rectory of Folden in
Norfolk, granted by your society to my wifes mother, the Lady
Button, and by her death accrewing to us, wee desire in Gods
fear, so far as lies in us, to restore that portion of the Lords
to the seruice of the Lord. We would choos silently to discharge
this duty; but we hope God will inclin the hearts of so worthy a
school of the prophets, both to place a godly and lerned pastor
at Folden, now voyd, and to perpetuat that mayntenance which I
can only perform for a few years. In order to which we are
willing to resign our leas upon these terms, - viz. That you wil
promis under your hands to joyn your best endevors with ours,
that assoon as may be, by act of Parlement, the profits of the
rectory of Folden surmounting your rent reserued upon our leas,
may be vnited to the vicarag, and settled for ever upon the
incumbent minister at Folden; that until this vnion be effected,
according to law, you will renew the leas for twenty- and one
years future, either to myself or some other person of
responsible estat and integrity, only in trust and for the use
and benefit of the minister of Folden for the time being, which
leassee shal also giv bond of 500 lb. penalty not to conuert the
profits aforsaid to any other use then is expressed. 
   Concerning the next incumbent, I beseech you accept my thanks
for your curteous offer by Mr. Naylor, of the nomination, of
which favor I shall only desire this, that before you confer
your presentation, the person may be aproved by my reverend
friend Dr. Tuckney. I understand the benefit of my leas will
augment the mayntenance to 100 lb. yearly, which wil be a
comfortable subsistence for an able divine. To such an one I
<P 238>
beseech God direct your choice, and bles your society, to send
forth many faithful laborers into the vineyard of the Lord, who
from thence may be transplanted to shine as the stars for ever.
Thus prays
   Your most assured friend to serve you,
   Edw. Harley.
(^Decemb. 14, 1658.^)

<Q HAR 1658 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 238>
[} [\(2.) LETTER TO DR. TUCKNEY, MASTER OF ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE
CAMBRIDGE. EDWARD HARLEY TO THE REVEREND DR. TUCKNEY, MASTER OF
ST. JOHN'S COLLEDG, AND REGIUS PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN
CAMBRIDG, PRESENT THESE.\] }] 
   Reverend S=r= - Whereas the Master and Fellowes of Caius
Colledg have pleased in contemplation of some interest I hau in
the impropriat rectory of Folden in Norfolk, to offer me the
nomination of the next incumbent, now voyd, and in the colledges
gift, of which favor I have only thus far accepted, to desire
that the person the college intend to present may be first
aproved by yourself, whom I beseech to be wel assured, that the
person you shall approv, be orthodox in doctrin and disciplin,
and of a godly conversation. Your acquaintance with my dear
father, who is with God, encorages me in this boldness to
trouble you, as your known worth gives me confidence to entrust
you. I shal be most glad of any occasion to present you a
thankful return from, S=r=,
   Your very faithful friend and servant, E. H.
(^Tawstok in Devon, Decemb: 14, 1658.^)

<Q HAR 1665 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 240>
[} [\(1.) LETTER FROM SIR EDWARD HARLEY TO THE LORD CHANCELLOR 
CLARENDON. 12 DEC. 1665.\] }] 
   May it please your Lordship - I humbly address this to wipe
off that breath would intercept the clearness of your Lordship's
favor, wherein (in that degree became me) I thought myself
happy. My Lord Bishop of Hereford since his return from
Parliament told me that your Lordship had acquainted him you had
received some late informations concerning me, as if I were not
well affected, neither to the church nor state, and that I
countenanced factious persons. Particular instances or proofs of
this general accusation my Lord Bishop did not mention to me,
<P 241>
and if such were given to your Lordship, I doubt not most
clearly to disprove or refute them. 
   I shall therefore (after most humble thanks for the notice
your Lordship hath pleased thus to give me, wherein I hope I
mistake not your favors towards me) beg leave to rectifye myself
before your Lordship. 
   As for my religion, I thank God I can truly say I have no
opinion but what is consonant to the Catholic faith and the
doctrines of the Church of England, but what I have learned out
of the Scriptures and the writings of the ancient fathers;
accordingly, through God's help, I endeavour to lead my life,
which, to clear me from all suspicion of schism, hath not only
the present and sufficient evidences of a constant and reverend
attendance upon divine service, but in times of danger had the
testimony of many hazards, and expences in behalf of reverend
persons of the church. I could say more, but I forbear, least I
speak like a fool. My Lord, I wonder not that I am now reported
to be a countenancer of factious persons, for I well remember
when I served his Majesty in Dunkirk, it was commonly said, that
the chaplains I brought into garrison were factious persons. But
the truth was, I discarded the factious, and introduced learned
and pious persons, who are now, one of them a prelate, the
others, reverend divines in the church. I can now also truly
averr, that I have not countenanced any factious persons, nor
have such persons resorted to me, nor hath there been in my
family any factious or unlawful meeting. 
   As for my affection to his Majesty's service, it is now
twenty years since, upon that account I have constantly lost,
done, and suffered: and in order to his Majesty's happy
restoration I did, without the vanity of comparison, employ all
the poor ability of my estate and person. My Lord, what I did
then, I did out of duty - I had not any other design. My Lord
General knew how unwillingly I undertook the command of Dunkirk.
In that employment, I thank God, I served his Majesty with all
fidelity and affection, and with as much devotion as ever my
life is always at his Majesty's service. 
   In the beginning of July, I was visited extreamly with the
gout in both my legs, from which affliction I have not been
wholly free for ten days space, that kept me from attending my
duty in Parliament. But in this part of the country, where I
reside, I can truly affirm the King's service, in all respects,
hath been diligently and faithfully managed.
<P 242>
   My Lord Bishop told me that the like information was brought
to your Lordship, concerning my brother Thomas as concerning
myself. As for him, though I had not sooner opportunity to
signifye, I had a most grateful sense of your Lordship's favor
in making him a Master in Chancery. He doth most humbly profess
the like, and what I have alleadged for myself, I can do the
same for him; that both his religion and loyalty are most
affectionately orthodox and sincere. Having said thus much, I
beseech I may add the tender of most humble service to your
Lordship from my brother Robert, who still remains with me in a
very weak condition. I hope your Lordship will vouchsafe credit
to these lines of truth, in behalf of a poor family, which hath
not deserved ill, I am confident, of those who have
misrepresented us. I heartily forgive all the injury, except the
necessity of so long a trouble to your Lordship, from, my Lord,
   Your Lordship's most obedient, most humble servant,
   E. Harley.
(^Brompton Brian, Dec. 12, 1665.^)

<Q HAR 1666 EHARLEY>
<A EDWARD HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 243>
[} [\(3.) LETTER FROM SIR EDWARD HARLEY TO THE LORD CHANCELLOR.
28 JAN. 1665-6.\] }] 
   I presume too much, to offer to your Lordship the trouble of
reading so many lines of no better subject than myself. I see,
it is too true, that it is very difficult to undertake one's own
cause, without committing great faults. Of one I am extremely
sensible - that I have occasioned your Lordship the pains of
answering my humble paper. I beg your pardon in all sincerity,
yet I cannot but reckon it a happy fault, by which I am
possessed of so 
<P 244>
many noble expressions of your Lordship's goodness and kindness,
as your lines bestow upon me. 
   I have many reasons to believe my Lord Bishop's friendship to
me, and specially because he hath several times related to me
your Lordship's fovourable discourse to him of me; but when I
shall have the honor to wait on your lordship, I shall, with
your leave, make appear what I said on my own behalf was not
altogether without cause. Though your Lordship be allways above
the endeavour, be pleased to accept the affection that devotes
me, my Lord,
   Your Lordship's most obedient, most humble servant,
   E.Harley.
(^Brompton Brian, January 28, 1665-6.^)
   To my Lord Chancellor Clarendon, &c.

<Q HAR 1638 RHARLEY>
<A ROBERT HARLEY>
<G M>
<P 49>
[} [\SIR ROBERT HARLEY TO ED. H.\] }] [^TO EDWARD HARLEY^]
[^PAGE XLIX IN NOTES TO INTRODUCTION^]
   "Ned Harley, - I thank you for y=r= letters, and desier so to
carry y=e= buisiness with you y=t= you may alwaies thanke mee
for mine, and now y=t= y=e= Lord hath in His good providence
disposed you in y=e= university, and with so worthy a tutor as
is M=r= Perkins, and under y=e= vigilent government of y=e=
Principall Do=r= Wilkinson, whose holy example lett every day
make impression in you of y=e= good in w=ch= he moves. You must
consider y=t= y=e= end is to gett 
<P 50>
inlargement of knowledg in y=e= understandinge chiefly of God in
Christ, w=ch= is life eternall, then of morrall science, w=ch=
will not only enriche y=r= mind but sett of yo=r= conversation
amongst men, as shaddows do some pictures, to y=e= workeman's
greater com'endation. Fyrst then take y=e= wise man's counsell
to remember y=r= Creator in y=e= dayes of y=r= youth, to love
Hym y=t= made you when you were not, and redeemed you with y=e=
preciouse blood of His deare Sonne when you were lost, w=ch= you
must finde to be from a vaine conversation, and love will teach
you y=e= feare of y=e= Lord, and y=ts= y=e= beginninge of
wisdome, w=ch= not only makes one man differ from another, as
reason doth man from a beast, but giveth life to hym y=t= hath
it; and it will give you an elevation above y=e= base wayes
wherein many young men wallow; and I feare y=e= universities do
too much abound with such pigges, from w=ch= y=e= preservative
must be daily prayer for God's blessinge on y=r= owne and y=e=
endevours of y=r= loving and graciouse tutor, whose care and
counsells if you answer with diligence and obedience you will
allsoe my expectation, with no little comforte; so, with my
constant prayers for y=e= blessings of our heavenly Father upon
you, I send you y=e= blessing of y=r= loving father,
   Ro. Harley.
   "Brampton Castle, (\19=o= 9bris\) , 1638."



<B WESA>

[^SAMPLE 1 = FOUR LETTERS OF LORD WENTWORTH, AFTERWARDS EARL OF
STRAFFORD, WITH A POEM ON HIS ILLNESS. ED. BY GARDINER, SAMUEL
RAWSON. CAMDEN MISCELLANY 8. CAMDEN NEW SERIES 31. 1883/1965.
SAMPLE 2 = PAPERS RELATING TO THE DELINQUENCY OF LORD SAVILE,
1642-1646. ED. BY CARTWRIGHT, JAMES J. CAMDEN MISCELLANY 8.
CAMDEN NEW SERIES 31. 1883/1965.^]

<S SAMPLE 1>
<Q WES 1632 TWENTWORT>
<A THOMAS WENTWORTH>
<G M>
<P 1>
[} [\LORD WENTWORTH TO THE EARL OF CARLISLE.\] }]
My much honored Lord,
   Thorowe the favoure of yours of the nine and twentithe of the
last moneth methinks I see the affaires of the house of Austria
a little to quicken againe, for the intrenchmentt of the Swede
showes the others to be maisters of the feilde; and that soe
many peeces of importance have declared themselves for Monsieur
asseures me France will not be in case to hurtt Spaine abrode
having soe much to doe for himself att home, being a solitary
Prince and a heire apparantt the heade of a Party aganst him.
Soe it seemes Fiat was a righteous man and taken from the evill
to cum, which methinks the Cardinall should hardly escape. But,
if I may prie into the Arke, I beseeche your Lordship, whie doe
not wee sum way or other declare ourselves roundly and put
ourselves in sum posture, at least in sum hope of regaining the
Palatinate. That Prince seems to me on all sides to be in the
lande wheare all things are forgotten. Oh my Lord, the house of
Austria hath a roote, will up againe; the King of Swede can have
noe time to make more then one faulte, and that proves
irremedilesse, if it should
<P 2>
chance to befalle him, therfore me thinks still it weare well we
be not all togeither swallowed up in the contemplation of his
last battell at Lipssick; besides that in his successfull
progresse hetherto he hath not presented himself soe lovely to
us, as that we have cause to dote on him. And now, my Lord, give
me leave to tell you how sore it presseth upon the zeale I have
to serve you that my condition in this place affords me noe
meanes to performe it, as I infinitly desire it might. In good
faithe, one pleasure I have when I thinke of Irelande, and
therin judge that imploymentt to have much the better of this,
it is that I hope ther to finde sum pathes open for my
thankfullnesse to walke in, and to meete with sum of your
interests in my passadge. Beleeve me, my Lorde, I will with all
diligence and perseverance treade the stepps which may leade me
to sum happy issue, which may becum in sum degree acceptable
unto you and soe hartely apprehende your commaundes your honoure
or benifitt, that he must be a bold man at armes that setts them
and me asunder. Till I manifest unto your Lordship this
constantt truthe, be pleased to oblige me by your beleefe
(whearin you shall never be deceaved) of my remaining
   Your Lordship's Most humble and most faithfull servantt,
   Wentworth.
   Yorke, this 12th of August, 1632.

<Q WES 1632 TWENTWORT>
<A THOMAS WENTWORTH>
<G M>
<P 2>
[^LORD WENTWORTH TO JAMES HAY, THE EARL OF CARLISLE.^]
My very good Lord,
   Ther is upon the way towards your Lordship a whole kennall of
houndes; five cople of them are for me, nor was I ever maister
of soe many before in all my life. I wishe they prove for your
liking; thus much in therbyhalfe, according to the dialecte of a
Northeren Cracker. Ther ancestors weare of thos famouse Heroes
that in the feildes of Hanworth and Wettwange weare of the
cheefe in sentte and vewe, and, if it came to a blacke hare, run
doggs,
<P 3>
horse, and men cleare out of sighte, and the silly beaste was
sure to die for it before she gott to the tow miles end. Your
Lordship is left free to your beleafe, but thus much shall be
sworne, if you desire an oathe for it; what thes thar oxpring
may performe upon the Alpes I cannot be resolved by our
huntsmen, but it is strongly supposed they will not prove
(\Pejores avis\) , and then the day is ours sure. The subjectt I
am upon is ritche and noble, and losse it weare to give it over
soe quickly; but truly, my Lord, if I end not quickly I shall
not see to write, soe as I must intirely assigne them over to
ther good fortune and myself to your favoure, wishing sum better
occasion by which I may expresse unto you how sincerely and
hartely I am
   Your Lordship's Most faithfull and most humble servante,
   Wentworth.
   Yorke, this 20th of December, 1632.
   My humble service to my Ladye I beseeche you; for such is the
speede and dullnesse of my sight as both conspire to give me noe
leisure or meanes to write any more.

<Q WES 1633 TWENTWORT>
<A THOMAS WENTWORTH>
<G M>
<P 3>
[^LORD WENTWORTH TO JAMES HAY, THE EARL OF CARLISLE.^]
My very good Lorde,
   This place administers little matter whearupon to exercise
the service I finde my hartte inclined to expresse unto your
Lordship everywheare, which misfortune I trust my industrye and
desire shall free me from the burthen of long labouring under
and sett me in sum nearer and better posture to your affaires in
Irelande, whear with extreame much comforte I flatter myself att
least not to continue thus still uselesse and fruitlesse in thos
lardge returnes towe your noble freindshippe.
   I have written to my Lord Mountnorris to pay over to Mr. Heye
for your Lordship's use the surplusadge of your wine customes in
Irelande, your rentt to his Ma=tie= deducted; but I am not a
little troubled with the apprehension that he will not take itt
for a sufficient
<P 4>
warrantte for him to issue the m[\...\] upon, as indeed itt is
not, and soe your Lordship be disappointed. To helpe this the
best I can till I can thether myself, I still call upon such of
your servants as I conceave are intrusted with your businesse to
hasten to your Lordship your warrantt from Mr. Atturney, which
may be returned backe heare and see the booke ready drawen
accordingly aganst his Ma=ties= cumming hether, when your
Lordship willbe pleased to see it perfected, and past under the
great seale. What they doe in it I heare not, but I will by
God's helpe goe to the Atturney myself, and, if they have
slacked, I will not, nor suffer him to be in quiet till I
procure itt and send it after you. Good my Lord, let it not be
any longer neglected, for it is of greate value, and willbe
worthe your paines to have it finally and authentically settled
in good forme of lawe.
   The Counsell goe every Sunday to waite upon the Queen. Her
Ma=ty= useth them with great grace and civility; but methinks is
sumthing sadde and lookes very much paler than she useth to doe.
   For myself, I am using all the diligence I possibly can to
gett away, and shall, God willing, be in a readinesse to begin
my jurney soe soon as I heare Captaine Plumley is gott aboute to
Beaumorris with the shipp that is to transporte me. He is
allready out of the river, soe as the next post that cums from
Chester I trust to have the newes of his safe arrivall, and till
then it weare to very little purpose for me to stirre from
hence.
   Wee heare ther is greate curtesyes passe betwixt your
Lordship and my Lord of Hollande, and heare all his freinds make
mighty addresses to my Ladye, but weather out of true respectts
to you tow singly, or complicated with sum secrett designe to
fortifie themselves the better to make themselves more able to
ballance to doe the Treasorour a shrewde turne, I conceave may
in good judgmente be doubted; for I am one of thos that beleeve
noe miracles, but that freindshipps which are to be trusted grow
up (\per media\) upon sum noble precedent existent matter,
wheare thos
<P 5>
which are skiped into thus (\per saltum\) are for the most
partte only to serve turnes and deceatfully temporary, and
therfore ever to be suspected. It must be time and your owne
wisdome which must discover this mistery, and therunto as unto
lights much abler to discerne and judge I submitt itt, having
myself noe other interest then to desire that all may succeede
to the honoure and happinesse of your Lordship and my Ladye; and
then in good faithe I am well pleased (that granted) which way
soever itt be convayed unto you. I am sorry this day proves soe
ill as will of necessitye keep his M=ty= within doores, and by
that meanes I feare hinder him from seaing the parke at Yorke,
which I have taken soe much care to reserve out of the Forest,
rather for the honoure and conveniency of the place I ther held
than for any private benefitt of my owne; for in good faith, my
Lord, money is not the price with me of anything, but the
kindnesse and love to my freinds, particularly to your Lordship,
I confesse must not be denied whatever can be required, and in
the power of
   Your Lordship's Most faithfull humble servante,
   Wentworth.
   Westminster.
[\INDORSED:\] 1633, June 25.

<Q WES 1633 TWENTWORT>
<A THOMAS WENTWORTH>
<G M>
<P 5>
[^LORD WENTWORTH TO JAMES HAY, THE EARL OF CARLISLE.^]
My very good Lord,
   Whatever my occasions or hast be, it must not deprive me the
happiness of still putting your Lordship in remembrance of this
servante of yours, who will ever be the readiest to receave and
the most carefull to fullfill your commaundes in the whole
world. Hear I am the whilst in excessive labourre to gett a
little before hande with my businesse, if possibly I may be soe
happy, being to deale with a generation that have the pointes of
ther weapon turned
<P 6>
wholly to ther owne privates, but noe edge att alle for the
publike; heare they are as dull as sharpe and eager to cut out
for themselves in the other. I see itt is a maxime amongst them
to keepe the Deputye as ignorantt as possibly they can, that soe
allbeit not in peace yet he may be subordinate to them in
knowledge, which I take to be the true reason that not any of
them hethertoo hath made me any proposition att all for the
bettering of his Ma=tyes= service. I am purposed on the other
side to open my eyes as wide as I can and dispaire not in time
to be able to sounde the depthe they covett soe much to reserve
from me. I finde all the revenew hear reduced to fee farmes and
noe possible meanes consequently to advance it, and in the meane
time greate matters expected, indeed impossibilities, from me in
Englande, which is a wofull condition of a servant to dwell
under the pressure of exspectation and be left or afforded noe
meanes to dischardge himself from under the burthen of itt. I
beseech your Lordship lett me in this, as I have dun in many
things els, finde your favour, and be pleased to take me soe
farre into your care as to weede out this growing inconvenience
forth out of our maister's minde, in case you at any time finde
itt to shoote up with him. There is not many that have the
meanes to doe it for me, nor many the particulars wherein you
may oblige me more than in this. I shall be sure to doe the
uttermost that lies in me, for I have a hartte can willingly
sacrifice all that ever I have for his Ma=ty= (if I doo not
deceave myself) with a chearfullnesse and faithe extraordinary;
only I am fearefull, that whilst impossibilities are exspected
at my hands, the best I can doe should not be accepted, nay,
imputed unto me as a crime. My Lord, I will detaine you noe
longer, further then to beseeche you to be confidentt I must
ever inviolatly approve myself
   Your Lordship's Most humble and most faithfull servantt,
   Wentworth.
   Dublin, this 27th of August, 1633.

<S SAMPLE 2>
<Q WES 1642 TSAVILE>
<A THOMAS SAVILE>
<G M>
<P 1>
[} [\LORD SAVILE TO LADY TEMPLE.\] }]
   [\November, 1642.\]
My Ladie Temple,
   I was verie much troubled at a report I had y=t= yo=r= house
was visited w=th= y=e= plague, but am exceeding glad to heare so
well of it now, as my Cosen Bland assures me, by a letter from
yo=r=selfe, in w=ch= letter shee saith you write y=t= you are
sorie to heare y=t= I have absolutelie declared my self ag=t=
the p~liam=t=, w=ch= I wonder at this time to heare, when all
the gentlemen of this countie complaine of me to the King for
being to affectionate to the p~liam=t=. And I am confident y=t=
S=r= John Hotham himselfe will say otherwaies of me then you are
enformed.
   But it hath beene my fortune still, ever to receive worst
usage where I thought y=t= I had best deserved, and never more
aparent then in the dealing w=ch= (by misenformation I hope) the
parliament hath done to me. To you I may w=th=out vaunting say,
that if this
<P 2>
parliam=t= have done anie greate matters for y=e= publique, ore
are in a condition more free then other parliam=ts=, God w=ch=
governes all things, and knowes all secretts, knowes this, that
if I were not at first the onelie, yet I was (though unworthie)
his chiefest, instrum=t= to bring it to pass. I never so much as
differd from them in anie thing whilst there was a syllable of
the petition ungranted w=ch= wee delivered at Yorke, and was
drawne, as you know, by Mr. Pymm himselfe and Mr. Sollicitor.
And so farr onelie wee were obliged by covenant amongst
oureselfes. For there alterations w=ch= they now desire in the
Church, let my Lo. Say and Brooke witnes for me, if ever I was
for it in my life; and therefore in a free p~liam=t= why it was
not lawfull for me to vote freelie, according to my conscience,
w=th=out to be made of y=e= malignant partie, I could not
imagine. Was there ever anie good message w=ch= they ever had
from y=e= King but something I contributed to it? Was there ever
anie violent one but I oposed it? The message at Windsor, where
y=e= K. granted the militia, I drew (which I have often hard
of). When my Lo. Howard and Sir Philipp Stapleton was at Yorke,
let them report of me what my part was; what I did w=th= the
King at Bev=r=ley, when my Lord of Holland and Sir Ph. Stapleton
brought the overture of peace, let them and all the courte
report. The message at Nottingham, where the King offered to
take downe his standard, dismiss his forces, and recall his
p~clamations, all the lordes know y=t= I both persuaded it, and
w=th= my owne handes, by the King's p~mission, drew it up. My
Lord of Cumberlande's Comission I protested against, made my
name be putt out of it, and where there was a clause to enable
him to levie money uppon the countie, in the open assemblie of
the gentlemen I declamed against it as being ag=t= the law and
subiectes libertie, for w=ch=, as my Lord of Dorsit and others
know, I was complained of to the King. Now I would faine know
for w=ch= of these actes I am forbidden to sitt in parliam=t=
and declared an enemie to the publique. Was I found guiltie of
bringing up the armie ag=t= the parliam=t=, or privie to the
Kings going into the Howse of Commons? Was I so much as privie
much less p~suading to his
<P 3>
leaving y=e= parliam=t=, and going to Yorke? Was I not against
both his going ag=t= Hull, Coventrie, and Warwick? Have I taken
anie commaund in the armie in this unnaturall warr? Did I not
retire to my owne howse (when the King broke up his house, so as
my attendance and oath tied me no longer) in peace and quiett,
and when I could do no further good, yet would not contribute to
anie of the fatall evills w=ch= must follow? Do I not at this
time heere protect all ministers and others y=t= p~fess religion
from y=e= violence of the times, so farr as to render me
suspected to all my frendes? Now, my Ladie Temple, iudge y=t=
when men y=t= have done the contrarie to all y=e= good y=t= I
have done, have done as much ag=t= the meeting of this p~lia=t=
as I have done for it, as much ag=t= peace as I have done for
it, have taken armes, commandes, ag=t= the parliam=t=, and still
continew so; have given publique and violent counsells when I
gave peaceable ones; yet not a man but myself, that I know this
day in England (without any impeachm=t= or calling to answer),
is forbidden the p~liament howse, and stigmatized w=th= the name
of enemie to the publique. I never yet could learne y=t= ever
they had anie thing ag=t= me to balance all the good offices
w=ch= I have done, but these 2 thinges onelie: the comminge
downe to Yorke w=th=out leave, and contrarie to there order, and
for what I did at Heworth Moore, in Yorkeshire, when the countie
was assembled there by the King's commaund; to both w=ch= thus
much. The oath which I tooke as Tresorer of y=e= King's howse is
flatt and plaine, to serve his Ma=tie= in y=t= office in his
howse and not to departe w=th=out his espetiall licence had and
obteigned first. As long as I could by anie mediation p~rvaile
w=th= the King to let me stay at y=e= parliam=t= I did stay when
he p~emptorilie under his owne hand, both uppon paine of my
allegiance, and my oathe taken, charged me to come downe and do
my s=r=vice in his howse. I durst not forsweare my selfe, but
came accordinglie and staied w=th= him whilst his household
continued, and then went home; for I was shutt out of the
p~liam=t= by a vote before, my offence being that I durst not
forsweare my selfe positivelie to obey an order, though manie
went contrarie to there order (no oath
<P 4>
compelling them neither), w=ch= for all that have no such
sentence. For y=t= of Heworth Moore, w=ch= they declared me an
enemie to the publique for doing, thus in breife: - Before my
coming to Yorke the King had apoynted y=t= meeting; and y=t=
morning I, finding that the devided people entended to have
pressed 2 petitions contrarie one to another uppon the King,
w=ch= in such a mightie concourse of people might have ended in
violence, and knowing that those who they terme the good partie,
and who came fearefullie under my assurance and p~tection, were
farr y=e= lesser number, I called to me John Reyner, Mr. Farer,
Mr. Todd, Mr. Rigeley, and all the heades of that partie, and
told them y=t= if they would assure me that there side would
deliver no petition, I would take such order that the other
should not. They repaired to there partie, and assured me there
should be none delivered by them; and so wee went to the field,
and finding S=r= John Bourchier reading, as they said, a
petition (though it was none), I, conceving he did it in
ignorance of oure agreem=t=, and contrarie to the will of the
honest men of his side, tooke it from him. And now behold y=e=
act y=t= makes me an enemie of y=e= Commonwealth. I have beene
long in these expressions, because I desire you would let them
be knowne, though not openlie publish my letter. To the truth of
all in it God is witnes, and men allso. Madam, I am
   Yo=r= faithfull freind,
   Savile.
   Commend my service to my Ladie Carli[{sle and{] [\?\]
Bedford, and all my frendes, and particularlie to my poore Cozen
Carr and his wife, whose busines I am afraide may miscarie by
reason of my absence from the courte, which greives me much.

<Q WES 1642 TSAVILE>
<A THOMAS SAVILE>
<G M>
<P 5>
[} [\THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^TO LADY TEMPLE^]
Ma.
   I shall ever augnowledge you have done me the office of a
frend, and in that way wherin I most valew frendshipp, that is
in good offices to the parliam=t=, towards whome, though I know
my owne harte, how it is and ever hath beene sett, yet it is now
a greate office of frendshipp to make one to be understood as he
is. Comend my service to my Lord Sey and to noble Sir Ph.
Stapleton, and assure them that I will never forgett y=e=
publique nor these p~ticuler favoures (if it please God to leave
me anie power). Tell my Lo. Sey y=t= peradventure he may be as
falselie represented where I am at the courte, as I may be where
he is at the parliam=t=. I desire but the same iustice from him
there as he shall be sure to find from me heere, and to believe
thus of me, that either I will see such an acomodation as I may
live in court in the fellowshipp of noble, vertuous, and
deserving persons, or at least not at all w=th= such persons
(whome he may imagine) y=t= shall beare sway. For anie honor to
be done to the howse by anie augnowledgm=t= of mine I shall
never grudge, nor thinke I took anie honor y=t= the howse gaines
by me. My hart should second my wishes in comming to you, but
y=t= this bearer can tell you how strictlie wee are beseiged
heere, so as not so much as a serving man, much less my selfe,
can yet stirr one mile out of towne. And w=ch= is most
miserable, oure deliverance in probabilitie must come by my Lord
of Newcastle's forces, manie of which are Papists as his
declaration (w=ch= I presume you have seene) will let you
understand: all which doth leade me into the consideration of
those unspeakable miseries which this once flourishing contrie
doth now grone under. First S=r= John Hotham's and y=e=
Lincolnshire forces called to his assistance under the pretence
of setling the militia and seazing of delinquents, this countie
(I will speake faithfullie) hath been robbed of and impoverished
above a hundred thowsand pound w=th=in this little space, and
[\...\] manie licentious plunderings and villanies committed as
are incredible, and
<P 6>
w=ch= I am loth to name, because done under the sacred name of
parliament; and to say truth according to there power, much
after the same manner done by oures. And to remedie all this and
to make the mesure of there suffrings full the loosing side is
glad to call in my Lord of Newcastle w=th= 6,000 men qualified
as aforesaid; and p~adventure my Lord of Derbie allso, if
t'other be not sufficient, will be called in allso, to do as
much for the one part as hath allreadie been don to the other,
and so leave no one p~son between them that shall not be made
miserable, ruined, and undone, besides an occasion given the
Romanistes to assemble in a bodie together. For preventing of
this miserie I am now as active as I can; and if I can prevaile
and y=t= anie reason will satisfie the parliam=t= forces, wee
will endure it rather than admitt this cure, w=ch= being
effected or attempted to my power, if I can gett by anie meanes
away, you shall see me shortlie after; and in the meane space I
will be preparing and shall ever rest
   Your faithfull frend and servant.

<Q WES 1642 TSAVILE>
<A THOMAS SAVILE>
<G M>
<P 6>
[} [\THE SAME TO THE SAME.\] }] [^TO LADY TEMPLE^]
   [\December, 1642.\]
Madam,
   I did receive youre letter, which was dated the 29 of Octob.
uppon the 10 of November, so it had a verie slow passage. All
letters are now opened, so I am glad to disguise my hand neither
with superscription nor subscription; the bearer will know who
to deliver it unto, and you will then easilie guess from whome
it comes. You desire to know what my aimes and intentions are,
that my frendes may do me service. I answer, the same they ever
was; since you let in my Lord Lowden, I would not have the K.
trample on y=e= p~liam=t= nor the p~liament lessen him so much
as to make a way for the people to rule us all. I hate papists
so much as I would not have the King necessetated to use them
for his defence, nor owe
<P 7>
anie obligation unto them. I love religion so well as I would
not have it putt to the hazard of a battle. I love libertie so
much that I would not trust it in the handes of a conqueror. For
as much as I love the King, I should not be glad he beate the
p~liam=t=, though they were in the wrong. I would do all good
offices I could for the parliam=t=, and me thinkes I could do
manie w=th=out loosing either my conscience or my master. If
they would give me leave and if I might uppon those faire and
Christian termes, I would be glad to come to my house at London,
where I should be able to enlarge myselfe further then now I
dare where nothing can pass w=th=out search. Madam, you see, as
I ever did, that I speake freelie, and not as biased nor
enclined by the p~liam=ts= success; for wee heere are assured
the K. is prosperous at this time neere London. The Q. wee
heare, last night landed at Newcastle with great supplies from
Denmarke. My Lo. of Newcastle and wee heere have almost ten
thousand men together; and yet my desires are still the same to
have no conquests of either side, nor shall ever desire to live
to see the ruine of an English parliam=t=. I will say it once
againe, if I may safelie and honorablie come to London, I doupt
not but they shall find there worst frend is not com.
   Since I writt first unto you Mr. Hotham (when I litle
expected such a comand) by a command from y=e= parliam=t=, as he
saith, hath seased on my howse, and all I have, to the valew of
som 1,300 (^l.^) in money and goodes, and yet threatens to
deface the carcase of Howley. Whether I have deserved this usage
God will determine one day, and how iust it is the aughters will
feele.
   I am infinitelie glad, for all this that my Cleopatra is
recovered, that all youres are well, and would be mightie glad
to see both my cozen Carrs.
[\COVER ADDRESSED:\] For La. Te. Lincolne Ins feildes.



<B CHARLES>

[^SAMPLE 1 = FIVE LETTERS OF KING CHARLES II. ED. BY THE MARQUIS
OF BRISTOL. CAMDEN MISCELLANY 5. CAMDEN FIRST SERIES 87.
1864/1968.
SAMPLE 2 = LETTERS OF THE COUNCIL TO SIR THOMAS LAKE, RELATING
TO THE PROCEEDINGS OF SIR EDWARD COKE AT OATLANDS. ED. BY
GARDINER, SAMUEL RAWSON. CAMDEN MISCELLANY 5. CAMDEN FIRST
SERIES 87. 1864/1968.^]

<S SAMPLE 1>
<Q CHA 1657? CHARLES2>
<A KING CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 5>
[} [\I. KING CHARLES II. TO QUEEN HENRIETTA MARIA.\] }]
   Antwerp, 26 July [\1657?\] .
   Madame,
   I hope your Majestie hath that good opinion of me, as to
beleeue
<P 6>
that your commandes carries euer so much waight with me, that at
any time when I doe not comply with them, your Majestie may
conclude the inconveniences on my parte are so greate, as I am
confident you would be troubled if I should obay you, and the
truth is, this businesse of my Lord Balcarres is of that nature;
for your Majestie may be confident, that, after haueing giuen
him so good a carrecter as I did at his first comming to Paris,
I would not call my iudgement so farre in question, or run the
venture of being thought apte to change my opinion of men vpon
light groundes, if I had not those proofes against him of duble
dealing and dishonesty as would iustifie me to all the world,
though I had proceeded against him with a much seuerer sentence
then hetherto I haue declared; and, because your Majestie shall
not take my single worde for it, I will sende you, as soone as I
come where the papers are, the proofes of what I say vnder his
owne hande, which, if your Majestie will consider with an
indifferent eye, you will at least conclude him not very fitt to
put obligations vpon; and, for the promise your Majestie and my
sister are ingaged in, can be of no waite in this particular,
for certainly at the same time the person misbehaues him selfe
he forfetts also the engagement, and I am confident your
Majestie thinkes whosoeuer is faulty to me is so to you; I am
sure it shall euer be so on my parte towardes your Majestie. I
should say much more to your Majestie but that I deferre it till
I can sende you the papers I mention, and will only now assure
your Majestie that I am and ever will be, Madame,
   Your Majesties most humble and most obedient sone and
seruant,
   Charles R.
[\NEITHER ADDRESSED NOR SEALED.\]

<Q CHA 1656? CHARLES2>
<A KING CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 7>
[} [\II. KING CHARLES II. TO LORD JERMYN.\] }]
   Bruges, 21 July [\1656?\] .
   I haue three of yours vpon my handes, one of the 7, an other
of the 14, of this month, and that of the 24 of the last which
Tom Talbott brought me yesterday. I must tell you there is a
mistake
<P 8>
in your bill for the 350 pistols, for Tom Blagge shewes me your
letter wherein you tell him you haue returned him 200 crowns,
for which he is to receaue 465 gilders out of my bill, whereas I
am informed by the marchant whome I haue imployd to receaue the
mony for me, that there is but 21 poundes Flemish (which amounts
but to 120 gilders and some odd shillings) more then is due to
me vpon the exchange for the 250 pistols, therfore you must
returne to him what is due ouer and aboue that summe. I hope you
haue before this time receaued an order for the six monthes that
are due, which I pray returne with all possible speede to me,
for I want it very much, though the ratification be come to me
from Spayne as fully as I could expect, of which I hope to
receaue frute very shortly, to which purpose I intende to send
to Brusselles within few dayes; there greate worke of
Valancienes being as you know well ouer, I shall be very glade
that a treaty betweene the two crownes may follow. Now,
concerning what you write to me by Tom Talbot, I am of your
opinion that I must be advised by these ministers heere in the
conducting that businesse, there creditt and authority being
likly to be of most vse to me in that place. I haue seald the
Earle of Inchequin's pattent, which I had signed so
<P 9>
longe since, therfore I pray lett notice be taken of it that he
may enioy all his rights.
[\POSTSCRIPT.\] I would haue you pay to S=r= R. Foster 200
liuers out of the first mony you receaue for me.
[\ADDRESSED\] - For my Lord Jermin.

<Q CHA 1656? CHARLES2>
<A KING CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 10>
[} [\III. KING CHARLES II. TO LORD JERMYN.\] }]
   Bruges, 20 October [\1656?\] .
   I haue receaued yours of the 13, and am so farre from being
vnsatisfied with the Cardinall's retrenching my pention, that I
am sure I haue tould you before, if he had inclined to haue
continued it, I would absolutly haue refused it. I pray therfore
sende me worde to what time they haue pay'd it, and so how much
I haue receaued from them, as likewise how much is in truth in
arreare to that time, that I may be able as well to say how much
they haue failed of making good what they promised, as to
acknowledge what I haue receaued. You say the Cardinall
preserues one equality towards me, that is, if here be any thing
attempted vpon England, he shall complayne of nothing that is
done; and yett, whilst he hath much more reason to beleeue that
will be the case then the contrary, he complayns more then would
become him whateuer the case shall be, and in all companyes
talkes of establishing Cromwell, and vses other expressions then
I expected from his discretion, when I gaue ouer expecting any
thing from his kindenesse. I wish you should tell him, that a
man who hath thought a necessity of his owne making warrant
enough for such proceedings against me as no necessity could in
truth excuse, should allowe a reall visible necessity, which he
cannot but decerne, a good iustification of my doeing what all
the world would laugh at me if I should not do; and you shall do
well to put him in minde that I am not yett so low, but that I
may returne both the courtisyes and the iniuryes I haue
receaued.
[\ADDRESSED\] - For my Lord Jermin.

<Q CHA 1657? CHARLES2>
<A KING CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 13>
[} [\IV. KING CHARLES II. TO LORD JERMYN.\] }]
   Brusselles, 2 August [\1657?\] .
   I was very sorry to heare that the Queene had forbiden Dr.
Cosins the exercise of our religion, as he was wont to do; you
will see what I have written to her vpon the matter, and I do
coniure you to vse your vtmost endeauors that her Majestie would
withdraw her commandes, and permitt the deane to officiat as he
hath done formerly, for otherwise it will produce those
inconveniences which are so visible as I thinke I neede not put
you in minde of them.
[\ADDRESSED\] - For my Lord Jermin.

<Q CHA 1660 CHARLES2>
<A KING CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 14>
[} [\V. KING CHARLES II. TO THE EARL OF ST. ALBAN'S.\] }]
   Brusselles, 3 April, 1660.
   I haue little to say to you, the post being not yett arriued
from England, which comes very vnseasonably, for we did expect
by these letters some thing of consequence, and the winde
continues so full east, as no ships can stirre from thence.
There is reports heere that come from Calais as if they should
haue past a vote in the house for king, lords, and commons, the
truth of which you know by this time. Pray hasten all you can my
comming to you; for,
<P 15>
besides the passion I haue to wayte on the Queene, I thinke it
the properest place for my publique concernes. There is a gunn
which I bespoke of the Turenes; if it be finished pray send it
to me, and I [\will\] returne you what it costs. God keepe you.
[\ADDRESSED\] - For the Earle of St. Alban's.

<S SAMPLE 2>
<Q CHA 1634 CHARLES1>
<A KING CHARLES I>
<G M>
<P 6>
[} [\I. KING CHARLES I. TO ELIZABETH QUEEN OF BOHEMIA.\] }]
   My onlie deare Sister,
   I hope shortlie to make a full dispatche to you by my Agent
Boswell, therfore I shall say littell to you at this tyme, but
that I hope ye beliue that it is not my want of affection to
your affaires, but Oxensternes want of instructions, that hes
made him haue so ill successe hithertoo in his negotiations, of
which I hope alreddie you haue had some accounte; & so I rest
   Your louing Brother to serue you,
   Charles R.
   Greenewiche the 13. of May, 1634.
   I hope the haste of the bearer will excuse the abruptness of
my letter.
[\NO ADDRESS OR SEAL.\]

<Q CHA 1643 OCROMWELL>
<A OLIVER CROMWELL>
<G M>
<P 8>
[} [\II. OLIVER CROMWELL TO SIR EDMUND BACON, SIR WILLIAM
SPRING, SIR THOMAS BARNARDISTON, AND MAURICE BARROW.\] }]
   Gentlemen, - Noe man desires more to praesent you with
incoragments then my selfe, because of the forwardnesse I finde
in you (to your honor bee it spoken) to promote this great
cause, and truly God followes you w=th= incoragments, whoe is
the God of blessinges, and I beseech you lett him not loose his
blessings vpon vs; they come in season, and with all the
aduantages of hartninge, as if God should say, "Up and bee
doeinge! and I will helpe you and stand by you." There is
nothinge to bee feared but our owne sinn and sloath.
   It hath pleased the Lord to giue your seruant and souldiers a
notable victorie now att Gainsbrowe. I marched, after the
takinge of Burlye house, vpon Wedensday to Grantham, where mett
mee about 300 horse and dragoones of Notingham. With theise, by
agreement with the Linconers, wee mett att North Scarle, w=ch=
is about tenn miles from Gainsbrowe, vpon Thursday in the
eueninge, where wee tarried vntill two of the clocke in the
morninge, and then, with our whole body, aduanced towards
Gainsbrowe. About a mile and halfe from y=e= towne wee mett a
forlorne hope of y=e= enimie of neere 100. horse. Our dragoones
labored to beate them backe; but, not alightinge off their
horses, the enemie charged them, and beate some 4. or fiue of
them off their horses. Our horse charged them,
<P 9>
and made them retyer vnto their maine body. Wee aduanced and
came to the bottom of a steepe hill vpon w=ch= the enimie stood.
Wee could not well gett vp but by some tracts, w=ch= our men
assayinge to doe, a body of the enimie indeauored to hinder,
wherein wee praeuailed, and gott the top of the hill. This was
donn by the Linconers, whoe had the vantgaurd. When wee all
recouered the top of the hill, wee saw a great body of the
enimies horse facinge of vs att about muskitt shott or lesse
distance, and a good reserue of a full regiment of horse behinde
itt. Wee indeauored to putt our men into as good order as wee
could, the enimie in the meane tyme aduancinge towards vs to
take vs att disaduantage, but in such order as wee were wee
charged their great body. I hauinge the right winge, wee came vp
horse to horse, where wee disputed itt with our swords and
pistolls a pretty tyme, all keepinge close order, soe that one
could not breake the other. Att last they a little shrinkinge,
our men perceauinge itt pressed in vpon them, and immediately
routed this whole body, some flyinge on one side, others on the
other, of the enimies reserue, and our men persuinge them had
chase and execution about 5. or 6. miles. I perceauinge this
body, w=ch= was the reserue, standinge still vnbroken, kept
backe my maior Whaley from the chase, and with my owne troupe
and one other of my regiment, in all beinge 3. troupes, wee gott
into a body. In this reserue stood Generall Cavendish, whoe one
while faced mee, another while faced 4. of the Lincolne troopes,
w=ch= were all of ours that stood vpon the place, the rest
beinge ingaged in the chase. Att last the Generall charged the
Linconers, and routed them. I immediately fell on his reere with
my three troupes, w=ch= did soe astonish him that hee gaue ouer
the chase, and would fayne haue deliuered himselfe from mee, but
I pressing onn forced them downe a hill, hauinge good execution
of them, and belowe the hill droue the generall w=th= some of
his souldiers into a quagmier, where my Capt. Leiuetennant slew
him with a thrust vnder his short ribbs.
<P 10>
The rest of the body was wholly routed, not one man stayinge
vpon the place. Wee then, after this defeat, w=ch= was soe
totall, releiued the towne w=th= such powder and prouisions as
wee brought; w=ch= donn, wee had notice that there were 6.
troupes of horse and 300. foote on the other side of the towne,
about a mile off vs. Wee desired some foote of my Lord
Willoghby, about 400, and with our horse and theise foote
marched towards them. When wee came towards the place where
their horse stood, wee beate backe with my troupes about 2. or
3. troupes of the enimie, whoe retyred into a smale
<P 11>
village att the bottom of the hill. When wee recouered the hill,
wee sawe in the bottom, about a quarter of a mile from vs, a
regiment of foote, after that another, after that Newcastles
owne regiment, consistinge in all of about 50. foote colours,
and a great body of horse, w=ch= indeed was Newcastles armie,
w=ch= cominge soe vnexpectedlye putt vs to new consultations. My
Lord Willoghby and I, beinge in the towne, agreed to call off
our foote. I went to bringe them off; but before I returned
diuerse of the foote were ingaged, the enimie aduancinge with
his whole body. Our foote retraited in some disorder, and with
some losse gott the towne, where now they are. Our horse alsoe
came off with some trouble, beinge wearied w=th= the longe
fight, and their horses tyred; yett faced the enimies fresh
horse, and by severall remoues got off without the losse of one
man, the enimie followinge in the reere with a great body. The
honor of this retrait is due to God, as alsoe all the rest.
Maior Whaley did in this carry himselfe with all gallantrie
becominge a gentleman and a Christian.
   Thus haue you this true relation, as short as I could. What
you are to doe vpon it is next to bee considered. If I could
speake words to peirce your harts, with the sence of our and
your condition, I would. If you will raise 2000. foote att the
present, to encounter this armie of Newcastles, to raise the
seige, and to inable vs to fight him, wee doubt not by the grace
of God but that wee shalbe able to releiue the towne and beate
the enimie onn the other side Trent; whereas if somwhat bee not
donn in this, you will see Newcastles armie march vp into your
bowells, beinge now as it is on this side Trent. I know it wilbe
difficult to raise thus many in soe short tyme, but lett mee
assuer you its necessarie, and therfore to bee donn. Att least
doe what you may, with all possible expedition. I would I had
the happinesse to speake w=th= one of you. Truly I cannot come
ouer, but must attend my charge, our enimie is vigilant. The
Lord direct you what to doe. Gentlemen, I am
   Your faythfull servant,
   Oliuer Cromwell.
   July 31. 1643. Huntington.
<P 12>
   Giue this gentleman credence. Hee is worthy to bee trusted.
Hee knowes the vrgency of our affaires better then my selfe. If
hee giue you intelligence in point of tyme of hast to bee made,
beleiue him. Hee will aduise for your good.
[\ADDRESSED\] - To my noble friend's S=r= Edmon Bacon, k=t=. &
barronet, S=r= Will'm Springe, knights and barronetts, S=r=
Thomas Bernardiston, kg=t=., Maurice Barrowe, esq., present
theise.

<Q CHA 1669 CHARLES2>
<A KING CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 21>
[} [\V. KING CHARLES II. TO THE EARL, AFTERWARDS DUKE OF
LAUDERDALE.\] }]
   Whithall, 2 Nouember 1669.
   Though Robin Moray has by my derections answerd your letters,
and tould you how well I am satisfied with your proceedings in
Scotland, yett I cannot forbeare the repeating it to you my
selfe, and
<P 22>
withall to tell you the true sence I have of your industry and
dexterity in the whole proceedings. I shall not say any thing
particularly now concerning the vnion, because Robin has at
large tould you my thoughts in order to what is to be done on
your parts, which I thinke you will aprooue of when you consider
the length of our Parlament deliberations heere, and how
inconvenient a long sessions there would be in all respects. I
shall say no more to you now but to assure you of my kindnesse
and constant frindship.
   C. R.
[\ADDRESSED\] - For my Lord Commissioner.

<Q CHA 1678 NGWYNNE>
<A NELL GWYNNE>
<G M>
<P 25>
[} [\VII. NELL GWYNNE TO MR. HYDE.\] }]
   pray Deare Mr. Hide forgive me for not writeing to you before
now for the reasone is I have bin sick thre months & sinse I
recoverd I have had nothing to intertaine you withall nor have
nothing now worth writing but that I can holde no longer to let
you know I never have ben in any companie wethout drinking your
health for I loue you with all my soule. the pel mel is now to
me a dismale plase sinse I have uterly lost S=r= Car Scrope
never to be recourd agane for he tould me he could not live
allwayes at this rate & so begune to be a littel uncivil, which
I could not sufer from an uglye (\baux garscon\) . M=s= Knights
Lady mothers dead & she has put up a scutchin no beiger then my
Lady grins scunchis. My lord Rochester is gon in the cuntrei.
M=r= Savil has got a misfortune, but is upon recovery & is to
mary an hairres, who I thinke wont wont [\SIC\] have an ill time
ont if he holds up his thumb. My lord of
<P 26>
Dorscit apiers wonse in thre munths, for he drinkes aile with
Shadwell & M=r= Haris at the Dukes house all day long. my Lord
Burford remimbers his sarvis to you. my Lord Bauclaire is is
[\SIC\] goeing into france. we are a goeing to supe with the
king at whithall & my lady Harvie. the King remembers his sarvis
to you. now lets talke of state affairs, for we never caried
things so cunningly as
<P 27>
now for we dont know whether we shall have pesce or war, but I
am for war and for no other reason but that you may come home. I
have a thousand merry conseets, but I cant make her write um &
therfore you must take the will for the deed. god bye. your most
loueing obedunt faithfull & humbel
   sarvant
   E. G.



<B WHARTON>

[^LETTERS FROM A SUBALTERN OFFICER OF THE EARL OF ESSEX'S ARMY,
WRITTEN IN THE SUMMER AND AUTUMN OF 1642; DETAILING THE EARLY
MOVEMENTS OF THAT PORTION OF THE PARLIAMENT FORCES WHICH WAS
FORMED BY THE VOLUNTEERS OF THE METROPOLIS; AND THEIR FURTHER
MOVEMENTS WHEN AMALGAMATED WITH THE REST OF THE EARL OF ESSEX'S
TROOPS. ED. BY ELLIS, SIR HENRY. ARCHAEOLOGIA 35: 310-334.
1854.^]

<Q WHA 1642 NWHARTON>
<A NEHEMIAH WHARTON>
<G M>
<P 4>
[} [\I.\] }] [^NEHEMIAH WHARTON TO GEORGE WILLINGHAM^]
   Alisbury, August the 16th, 1642.
   Worthy Sir,
   On Monday, August the 8th, we marched to Acton; but beinge
the Sixth Company, we were belated, and many of our soldiers
were constrained to lodge in beds whose feathers were above a
yarde longe. Tuesday, early in the morninge, several of our
soldiers inhabitinge the out parts of the towne sallied out unto
the house of one Penruddock, a papist, and being basely
affronted by him
<P 5>
and his dogge, entred his house, and pillaged him to the
purpose. This day, also, the souldiers got into the church,
defaced the auntient and sacred glased picturs, and burned the
holy railes. Wensday: Mr. Love gave us a famous sermon this day;
also, the souldiers brought the holy railes from Chissick, and
burned them
<P 6>
in our towne. At Chissick they also intended to pillage the Lord
of Portland's house, and also Dr. Duck's, but by our commanders
they were prevented. This day our soldiers generally manifested
their dislike of our Lieftenant Colonell, who is a Godamme
blade, and doubtlesse hatche in hell, and we all desire that
ether the Parliament would depose him, or God convert him, or
the Devill fetch him away quick. This day, towards even, our
regiment marched to Uxbridge, but I was left behinde, to bring
up thirty men with ammunition the next morning. Thursday I
marched toward Uxbridge; and at Hillingdon, one mile from
Uxbridge, the railes beinge gone, we got the surplesse, to make
us handecherchers, and one of our soildiers ware it to Uxbridge.
This day the railes of Uxbridge, formerly removed, was, with the
service boock, burned. This even Mr. Hardinge gave us a worthy
sermon. Friday, I, with three other commaunders, were sent with
one hundred musquetteres to bringe the amunition to Amersam in
Buckinhamshire, which is the sweetest country that ever I saw,
and as is countrey so also is the people, but wantinge roome for
the regiment comminge after us we were constrained to marche
four miles further unto Greate Missenden, where we had noble
entertainment from the whole towne, but especially from S=r=
Brian Ireson and the minister of the towne. Satturday morninge,
our companies overtoke us and we marched together unto Alsbury,
and after we had marched a longe mile, for so they are all in
this countrey, wee came to Wendever, where wee refreshed
ourselves, burnt the railes, and, accidentally, one of Captaine
Francis his men, forgettinge he was charged with a bullet, shot
a
<P 7>
maide through the head, and she immediately died. From hence wee
marched very sadlye two miles, where Colonel Hamden, accompanied
with many gentlemen well horsed, met us, and with great joy
saluted and welcomed us, and conducted us unto Alsbury, where we
have a regiment of foote, and severall troopes of horse to ioyne
with us. In this towne our welcome is such that wee want
nothinge but a good Leiftenant Colonell. Sabath day, August the
15, in this towne a pulpit was built in the market-place, where
wee heard two worthy sermons. This eveninge our ungodly
Lieftenant Colonel, upon an ungrounded whimsey, commaunded two
of our captaines, namely, Captaine Francis and Captaine Beacon,
with their companies, to march out of the towne, but they went
not. Every day our soildiers by stealth doe visit papists'
houses, and constraine from them both meate and money. They give
them whole greate loves and chesses which they triumphantly
carry away upon the points of their swords. I humbly intreate
you, as you desire the successe of our just and honorable cause,
that you would indeavor to roote out our Leiftenant Colonell;
for, if we march further under his commaund, we feare, upon
suffitient grounds, wee are all but dead men. Monday, August the
16th, Colonel Hamden marched out of Alisbury, with four hundred
musqueters and about an hundred horse, towards Wattleton, in
Oxfordshire, where the Commission of Aray was this day to be
setled; but they, hearinge of the aproch of our troopes, fled,
and our horse persued them so close that S=r= John Cursam was
taken, and the Lord of Bartie was constrained to take hynte hom,
sometime the Lord of Carnarvan's, where our companies have at
this present beset him. And thus much for the present. Touchinge
Leiftenant Colonell Biddeman formentioned, I once more humbly
beseech you - and not I alone, but many others, both
commaunders, officers, and common souldiers - that you would
endeavor to rout him. There are severall other circumstances
which I want time to expresse, for the office assigned mee is
very troublesome, and continually takes up my whole time; and,
therefore, for the present let these satisfie. To conclude, I
presentt you and mistris with my humble service, and doe give
you humble and hartie thankes for all your former and late
favors; and do intreate you to remember my humble service to Mr.
Molloyne and wife; my service also to Elizabeth, Anne, John, and
Sammuell, which I often think upon; and also my love to all my
fellow servants. In extreme hast, I rest,
   Your poore, auntient, humble, and affectionate servant to
commaund,
   Nehemiah Wharton.

<Q WHA 1642 NWHARTON>
<A NEHEMIAH WHARTON>
<G M>
<P 8>
[} [\II.\] }] [^NEHEMIAH WHARTON TO GEORGE WILLINGHAM^]
   Coventry, Aug. 26, 1642.
   Worthy Sir,
   August the 17, our companies, after they had taken sixe
delinquents and sent them to London, returned to Alesbury this
day; we retained two feild pieces and two troopes of horse, with
other necessaries for warre. Wensday morning a Warwickshire
minister, which the Calualleres had pillaged to the skin, gave
us a sermon. After noone our regiment marched into the feild and
skirmished. Thursday morning another sermon was given us. After
noone our regiment marched into the feild, but by reason of
foule weather were immediately definished. This night our
regiment was commaunded to march the next morninge by four of
the clock under our Leiftenant Colonell, but our sargeants
refused to surrender their halberts, and the souldiers their
armes, and not to march. Friday, very early in the morninge, our
Leiftenant Colonell was cashiered, for which I give you hearty
thankes, and Sergeant-Major Quarles imployed in his roome,
wherat both commaunders, officers, and souldiers exceedingly
rejoysed. This morninge wee cherfully marched towards Buckingham
in the rear of Colonell Chomley's regiment, by reason whereof we
could get no quarter there, but were constrained to quarter
ourselves about the countrey, wherupon I and three gentlemen of
my company visited that thrice noble gentleman S=r= Richard
Inglisby, where his owne table was our quarter, and
Serjeant-Major Burrif, and his sonne Captaine Inglisby, and
several other noble gentlemen were our comrades. Saturday, early
in the morning, I departed hence and gathered a compliete file
of my owne men about the countrey, and marched to Sir Alexander
Denton's parke, who is a malignant fellow, and killed a fat
buck, fastened his head upon my halbert, and commaunded two of
my pickes to bring the body after me to Buckingham, with a guard
of musquetteers comminge theither. With part of it I feasted my
captaine, Captaine Parker, Captaine Beacon, and Colonell
Hamden's sonne, and with the rest severall leiftenants,
enseignes, and serjeants, and had much thankes for my paines.
This day Sergeant Major our Generall came unto us, and declared
the commaund given him over our regiments. Sunday morninge wee
marched from Buckingham into Northamptonshire, a longe and
tedious jorney, wantinge both bread and water, and about ten at
night came unto Byfeild in dispight of our enemies, at which
towne we could get no quarter, neither meate, drinke, nor
lodginge, and had we not bin suplyed with ten cart loade of
provision and beare from Banbury, many of us had perished. This
night our company was commanded to guard the towne all night,
whiche after a longe and
<P 9>
tedious marche, unto me was very grevious. Monday morninge wee
marched into Warwick-shere with aboute three thousand foote and
four hundred horse, until we came to Southam. In the way we
tooke two Calvalleres spies. This is a very malignant towne,
both minister and people. We pillaged the minister, and tooke
from him a drum and severall armes. This night our soildiers,
wearied out, quartered themselves about the towne for foode and
lodginge, but before we could eate or drinke an alarum cryed
"arme, arme, for the enemy is commenge," and in halfe an hower
all our soildiers, though dispersed, were cannybals in armes,
ready to encounter the enemy, cryinge out for a dish of
Calvellaers to supper. Our horse were quartered about the
countrey, but the enemy came not, whereupon our soildiers cryed
out to have a breakefast of Cauallers. We barecaded the towne,
and at every passage placed our ordinance and watched it all
night, our soildiers contented to lye upon hard stones. In the
morninge early our enemise, consistinge of about eight hundred
horse and three hundred foote, with ordinance, led by the Earle
of Northampton, the Lord of Carnarvan, and the Lord Compton and
Capt=n= Legge, and other, intended to set upon us before wee
could gather our companies together, but beinge ready all night,
early in the morninge wee went to meete them with a few troopes
of horse and sixe feild peeces, and beinge on fier to be at them
wee marched thorow the corne and got the hill of them, wherupon
they played upon us with their ordinances, but they came short.
Our gunner tooke their owne bullet, sent it to them againe, and
killed a horse and a man. After we gave them eight shot more,
whereupon all their foote companies fled and offered ther armes
in the townes adjacent for twelve pence a peece. Ther troopes,
whelinge about, toke up their dead bodies and fled; but the
horse they left behind, some of them having ther guts beaten out
on both sides. The number of men slaine, as themselves report,
was fifty besides horse. One drumner, beinge dead at the bottome
of the hill, our knapsack boyes rifled to the shirt, which was
very lowzy. Another drummer wee found two miles of, with his
arme shot of, and lay a dieinge. Severall dead corps wee found
in corne feilds, and amongst them a trumpeter, whose trumpet our
horsemen sounded into Coventry. Wee tooke severall prisoners,
and amongst them Capt. Legge and Captaine Clarke. From thence
wee marched valiantly after them toward Coventry, and at
Dunsmore Heath they threatned to give us battaile, but we got
the hill of them, ordered our men, and cryed for a messe of
Calualleres to supper, as wee had to breakefast; but they all
fled, and we immediately marched into Coventry, where the
countrey met us in armes and wellcommed us, and gave us good
quarter both for horse and foote. In this battell I met with
your horseman Davey, and he and I present you and my Mistris
with
<P 10>
our most humble sarvice, desiringe you to pray for us, and doubt
not but both of [\us\] will valiantly fight the Lord's battaile.
Thus, with my service to Mrs. Elizabeth, Anne, John, and
Samuell, and my love to all my fellow servants, I rest,
   Yours, in all good services,
   Nehemiah Wharton.
   I pray present the humble servises of Gregory Kent and
myselfe unto Mr. Molloyne, with my best respects to Mr. Henry
Hickman, and inform him that I have received his booke, and
shall acknowledge my selfe engaged for the same. I would have
written unto him and others, my kindred and frends, but I want
time, and therefore must humbly intreate you to inform them
thereof. I earnestly desire to heare from you whether you
received a letter dated August 17th, or no.

<Q WHA 1642 NWHARTON>
<A NEHEMIAH WHARTON>
<G M>
<P 10>
[} [\III.\] }] [^NEHEMIAH WHARTON TO GEORGE WILLINGHAM^]
   Coventry, August the 30th, 1642.
   Noble Sir,
   As time permits, I desire to acquaint you with the passages
of my pilgrimage. My last unto you was from Coventry, August the
26th, which place is still our quarter; a City invironed with a
wall co-equal, if not exceedinge, that of London for breadth and
height; the compass of it is neare three miles, all of free
stone. It hath four strong gates, stronge battlements stored
with towers, bulwarks, courts of guard, and other necessaries.
This city hath magnificent churches and stately streets; within
it ther are also several sweete and pleasant springes of water
built of free stone, very large, sufficient to supply many
thousand men. The City gates are guarded day and night with four
hundred armed men, and no man entreth in or out but opon
examination. It is also very sweetly situate. Thursday, August
the 26th, our soildiers pillaged a malignant fellowes house in
this City, and the Lord Brooke immediately proclaimed that
whosoever should for the future offend in that kind should have
martiall law. This day command was given that all soildiers
should attend their colors every morne by sixe of the clock to
march into the feilde to practise, which is done accordingly.
Fryday several of our soildiers, both horse and foote, sallyed
out of the City unto the Lord Dunsmore's parke, and brought from
thence great store of venison, which is as good as ever I
tasted, and ever since they make it their dayly practise, so
that venison is almost as common with us as beefe with you. This
day our horse-men sallyed out, as their dayly custom is, and
brought in with them two Cavaleeres, and with them an
<P 11>
old base priest, the parson of Sowe, near us, and led him
ridiculously about the City unto the chiefe commaunders. This
day I againe met with Davy, your horseman, and both are in good
case, horse and man. Saturday I met with your auntient maide
servant Lydea, with her father and her brethren, who all wept
for joy when they saw mee an officer in this deseigne, for the
day wee marched into Coventry the rebels had command to pillage
Anstey, the habitation of her father, and Bromagam, the place of
her and her husband's dwellinge; both which are but three miles
from Coventry. She hath been maried three yeares, and presents
her service unto you and my mistris, and your children. Her
father invited mee and twenty of the cheife of my company to
dinner at Anstey, but time would not suffer us to accept it.
This day a whore, which had followed our campe from London, was
taken by the soildeirs, and first led about the city, then set
in the pillory, after in the cage, then duckt in a river, and at
the last banisht the City. Sunday morne the Lord of Essex his
chaplaine, M=r= Kemme, the cooper's sonne, preached unto us, and
this was the first sermon we heard since we came from Alisbury;
but before he had ended his first prayer newes was brought into
the church unto our commanders that Noneaton, some sixe miles
from us, was fired by the enemy, and forthwith our Generall and
several captaines issued forth, but I and many others stayed
untill sermon was ended, after which wee were commanded to march
forth with all speed, namely, my captaine with Captain Beacon
and Captain Francis of our regiment, and of other regiments, in
all to the number of one thousand foote and one troope of horse;
but before we came at them they ran all away, not having done
much harm; whereupon we returned to Coventry again with a
command to be ready in arms by five in the morning next upon
pain of death. Our men are very courageous, and that they may so
continue we desire, according to promise, a supply of faithfull
able ministers, which we exceedingly want. This morning we are
marching forth to pursue the rebels, and that we may obtaine
victory we againe desire your earnest and constant prayers.
Thus, with my humble service to your selfe and my mistris, and
also unto all your children, and also my love to all my fellow
servants, whether with you or from you, for the present, in
extreme hast, I rest but not to remaine till death,
   Your humble, lovinge, and thankfull servant,
   Nehemiah Wharton.
   I humbly intreate you favorably to accept these rude lines,
for I want time either to write or compose them in a more comely
forme. I earnestly desire to heare of the occurrantes of London.

<Q WHA 1642 NWHARTON>
<A NEHEMIAH WHARTON>
<G M>
<P 12>
[} [\IV.\] }] [^NEHEMIAH WHARTON TO GEORGE WILLINGHAM^]
   Northampton, September the 3, 1642.
   Noble Sir,
   Monday, August the 29, before we had marched two miles
towards the Cavalleeres, we were informed by the post that sixty
of them were taken and imprisoned in Northampton, and the rest
fled, whereupon we returned unto Coventry; and our company were
immediately commanded to guard part of the city, and a gate
called Newgate. About midnight our souldiers on the wall
discovered fier in the City, neare St. Mary Hall, our magazine,
which accidentally began at a baker's house, and in three or
four hours was quenched, and no great harm done, but the
citizens were much affrighted. Tuesday morning we officers weet
our halberts with a barrell of strong beere, called ould Hum,
which we gave our soldiers. This day Mr. Jephcot feasted me and
several of my company in Coventry. This even our soildiers
brought a cart loade of armes from Sir Robert Fisher's, some six
miles from Coventry, with his owne picture standing very stately
in the cart. Wensday wee kept the Fast and heard two sermons,
but before the third was ended we had an alarm to march
presently. By ten of the clock we gat our regiments together,
and kept our randevow in the City until midnight, and about two
in the morning marched out of this City towards Northampton.
This City hath four steeples, three churches, two parishes, and
not long since but one preist: but now the world is well amended
with them. This morne I was exceeding sick, and the pallet of my
mouth fell down; but Captain Beacon, my loving friend, upon our
march sent a mile for a little pepper and put it up again. This
day our souldiers brought with them three asses which they had
taken out of the Lord Dunsmore's park, which they loaded with
their knapsacks, and dignified them with the name of the Lord
Dunsmore. This day being Thursday we marched over Dunsmoore
Heath, near twelve miles, without any sustenance, insomuch that
many of our soildiers drank stinking water; until we came to
Barby, in Northamptonshire, where the country, according to
their ability, relieved as many of us as they could. Our
soldiers pillaged the parson of this town, and brought him away
prisoner, with his surplice and other relics. From hence we
marched four miles further unto Longe Bugby, where we had very
hard quarter, insomuch that many of our captaines could get no
lodginge, and our soildiers were glad to despossesse the very
swine, and as many as could quartered in the church; but here,
your man Davy, ridinge before our foote companies, gat mee both
foode and lodginge. This towne hath, for two
<P 13>
Sundayes together, bin so abused by the rebels, that both men,
women and children were glad to leave the towne and hide
themselves in ditches and corn fields. Friday, early in the
morning, a messenger came to our Colonell, that in the King's
house, called Homby, three miles distant, there were 500
musketters to cut of all our stragling soldiers, whereby wee
prevented them. This morninge our soildiers sallyed out about
the cuntrey, and returned in state clothed with a surplisse,
hood, and cap, representing the Bishop of Canterbury. From hence
we marched three miles, wher Homby House stands very stately
upon a hill, and the Lord of Northampton's house and parke neare
unto it; but we could not restraine our soildiers from entringe
his park and killinge his deer, and had not the Lord Gray and
our Sargent Major Generall withstood them they had pillaged his
house. This even we marched unto Northampton, where the
townesmen hearinge of our coming marched out into the country to
prevent the Commission of Array intended to be settled by the
Lord Mountagu and others, which Mountagu they brought prisoner
unto Northampton, and prevented his deseigne. This evening seven
troopes of horse came unto us. This night the Lord of
Northampton, by stealth, came into the towne, viewed our horse
forces, and in the morning discovered, but immediately escaped.
Saturday morning the Lord Munioz and his son were taken ridinge
through the towne. This eveninge all the serjeants of our
regiment met together, and out of twenty-three chose two for
stewards for a supper, and other more weighty affaires, and
chose me for one of them, which place is exceedinge troublesome
unto me. This day came S Arthur Hasleriges, and other troopes,
into our towne. This day our souldiers brought in much venison,
and other pillage, from the malignants about the country. This
evening we feasted all our sargeants, with some other superior
officers, which is very troublesome and chargeable and I cannot
avoide. This night I invited your man Davy and his comrade, and
made them welcome. Thus with my humble service to you, my
mistris, and your children, and my love to all my
fellow-servants, in extreme hast I rest
   Your servant till death,
   N. W.
   I pray let me heare from you by this bearer.

<Q WHA 1642 NWHARTON>
<A NEHEMIAH WHARTON>
<G M>
<P 14>
[} [\V.\] }] [^NEHEMIAH WHARTON TO GEORGE WILLINGHAM^]
   Northampton, September the 7th, 1642.
   Worthy Sir,
   I present you and my Mrs. with my humble service, wishinge
you and all yours the constant fruition of all hapinesse. This
is my fifth letter unto you, but I question whether ever you
received one of them, because you never yet honoured mee with a
peece of paper. I have, therefore, once more sent unto you by
this bearer, Lieutenant Wade, who hath promised to deliver these
with his owne hands. Our place of rendevoues is still at
Northampton, which, for situation, circuit, and statelynese of
buildinge, exceeds Coventry; but the walls are miserably ruined,
though the country abounds in mines of stone. From hence I have
nothinge remarkable to present you with, neither will time
permit me to acquaint you with circumstances. This morninge our
regiment being drawne into the fielde to exercise, many of them
discovered their base ends in undertaking this designe, and
demaunded five shillings a man, which, they say, was promised
them monthly by the Committee, or they would surrender their
armes. Whereupon Colonell Hamden, and other commaunders,
laboured to appease them, but could not: so that if they have
not the forenamed supply, we feare a very great faction amongst
us. There is also great desention betweene our troopers and foot
companies, for the footmen are much abused and sometimes
pillaged and wounded. I myselfe have lately experimentally found
it, for they tooke from me about the worth of three pounds; but
I am not discouraged by any of these, but by God's assistance
will undauntedlye proceede, for God is able to reconcile all our
diferences. Sir, I humbly entreate you to send me small feather,
white and one tip of black, by one Gregory Kent, knowne unto Mr.
Molloyne, and livinge neare him; he will be with mee on
Saturday, at night. I shall be very joyfull at the last to heare
of the welfare of you all. Thus committynge you into the custody
of the most Heigh, for the present I rest
   Your humble servant till death,
   Nehemiah Wharton.
   The bearer stayed the writing thereof, which is the cause of
my rustick scriblinge and inditinge.

<Q WHA 1642 NWHARTON>
<A NEHEMIAH WHARTON>
<G M>
<P 15>
[} [\VI.\] }] [^NEHEMIAH WHARTON TO GEORGE WILLINGHAM^]
   Northampton, Sept. the 13th, 1642.
   Thrice worthy Sir,
   Accordinge to custome I present you with our particular
circumstances. My last unto you of this nature was Sept. the
2nd, being Saturday. Sabath day, Sept. the 3d, wee peaceably
injoyed. Munday morning I was informed by a countryman of a base
priest, six miles distant, which had set out horse for the
Commission of Aray and had arms in his house, and I immediately
got twenty musketteers and marched out to search the house. The
countryman I clothed with a soildier's red coate, gave him arms,
and made him my guide: but having marched two miles, certain
gentlemen of the country informed mee that Justice Edmonds, a
man of good conversation, but since I hear of the Aray, was
plundered by the base blew coats of Colonell Cholmley's
regiment, and bereaved of his very beeds, whereupon I
immediately devided my men into three squadrons, surrounded
them, and forced them to bring their pillage upon their own
backs unto the house againe: for which service I was welcomed
with the best varieties in the house, and had given me a scarlet
coate lined with plush, and several excellent bookes in folio of
my own chusinge; but returning, a troope of horse belonging unto
Colonel Foynes met me, pillaged me of all, and robbed mee of my
very sword, for which cause I told them I would other have my
sword or dye in the field, commaunded my men to charge with
bullet, and by devisions to fier upon them, which made them with
shame return me my sword, and it being towards night I returned
to Northampton, threatninge revenge upon the base troopers. This
night and the day following our company by lot watched the south
gate, where I searched every horseman of that troop to the skin,
took from them a fat buck, a venison pasty ready baked, but lost
my own goods. Wensday morning we had tidings that Prince Robert,
that diabolical Cavaleere, had surrounded Lester and demaunded
two thousand pounds, or else threatned to plunder the towne:
whereupon our soldiers were even madde to be at them, but wanted
commission. All the venison belonging to malignants in the
country are destroyed. Thursday our soildiers marched in to the
feilde to exercise, and there declared their basenes, specified
in a former letter composed in part, and intended to be sent by
Leiftenant Wade, but he could not stay the wrighting of it. This
day most of the Ministers nominated in your letter came unto me.
Friday morning worthy Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick gave us a worthy
sermon, and my company in particular marched to hear him in
<P 16>
rank and file. Mr. John Sedgwick was appointed to preach in the
afternoone; but we had newes that Prince Robert had plundered
Harbrough and fired some adjacent townes, and our regiment were
immediately drawn into the field, but being informed of ther
flying away we returned. Saturday morning Mr. John Sedgwick gave
us a famous sermon. After noone our regiments marched forth to
meet his Excellency, who was in great state welcomed into the
town, and the watch word this night was "Welcome." This night
and the day following our company watched the north gate.
Sabbath day morning Mr. Marshall, that worthy champion of
Christ, preached unto us. After noone Mr. Ash, by relation, but
as yet I have not seen him. These with their sermons have
already subdued and satisfied more malignante spirits amongst us
than a thousand armed men could have done, so that we have great
hope of a blessed union. Monday morning I received your letter,
dated Septr. the 8th, with my mistresses scarfe and Mr.
Molloyne's hatband, both which came very seasonably, for I had
gathered a little money together, and had this day made me a
soildier's sute for winter, edged with gold and silver lace.
These gifts I am unworthy of. I have nothing to tender you for
them but humble and harty thanks. I will wear them for your
sakes, and I hope I shall never staine them but in the blood of
a Cavaleere. Your letter, being a pitthy, sollid, brief, and
reall relation, I presented to my captain and all the captaines
of our regiment together at dinner with Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick,
who rejoysid at the newes and gave me much thankes. My captain
greets you with his best respects. Tuesday; this day his
Excellency intends to view our forces. Wensday we expect the
celebration of a fast. Thursday we expect to march with all our
forces towards Lester, and I doubt not but we shall scowre the
Cavalleers. Your man Davy remembers his service unto you, and
gives humble thanks for your kind remembrance of him. I have not
any other thinge for the present to acquaint you with;
therefore, with my humble service to your selfe, my mistris, Mr.
Molloyne, and his wife, and unto all yours and their children,
and my love to the servants of both houses,
   I conclude, until death remaininge,
   Your humble, thankefull, and deeply ingaged servant at
command,
   Nehemiah Wharton.
   Every Wensday you may find a post that serveth our army at
the Saracen's Head, in Carter Lane. His name is Thomas Weedon,
who is with us once a week constantly.

<Q WHA 1642 NWHARTON>
<A NEHEMIAH WHARTON>
<G M>
<P 17>
[} [\VII.\] }] [^NEHEMIAH WHARTON TO GEORGE WILLINGHAM^]
   Noble Sir,
   September the 13th was my last unto you; this even wee had
tidings that Killingworth Castle, in Warwickshire, six miles
from Coventry, was taken, with store of ammunition and money,
and some prisoners, their number uncertain; the rest fled, and
the country pursued them, and wanted but the assistance of
Coventry to destroy them all. Wednesday, Sept. 14th, our forces,
both foot and horse, marched into the field, and the Lord
General viewed us, both front, rear, and flank, when the drums
beating and the trumpets sounding made a harmony delectable to
our friends, but terrible to our enemies. This even, contrary to
expectation, our regiment marched five miles north-east unto
Stratton, where we, and as many as could, billited in the town;
the rest quartered thro' the country. Thursday our regiment met
again, when those famous lawes for our army were read and
expounded. This day we received and accepted Serjt. Major Neale.
Friday our regiment were commanded to meet here again to be
mustered, where we exercised in the field the whole day, and the
muster master came not, whereat we were all much displeased.
This night our company by lot watched the town. Saturday our
regiment met again and were mustered. This even Captain Francis,
returning from London, informed me of the couragiousness and
constancy of the City of London, and also of their constant
supply of money and plate; and also told me that the whole city
were now either real or constrained Roundheads. Sabbath day wee
peaceably injoyed with Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, who gave us two
heavenly sermons. Munday morning our regiment began to march
towards Warwickshire and passed through Wes-Haddon, Creeke, and
Hill Morton, where we had a supply of drink, which upon a march
is very rare and extraordinary welcome, and at the end of ten
miles we came to Rugby, in Warwickshire, where we had good
quarter. At this town Mr. Norton formerly preached. This town
also was lately disarmed by the Cavaliers on the Sabbath day,
the inhabitants being at church. Tuesday morning our regiment
marched two miles unto Dunsmore Heath, where the Lord General
and his regiment met us, as also the Lord of Stanford, Colonel
Cholmley, and Colonel Hampden, with many troops of horse and
eighteen field pieces, where we kept our rendesvouz until even,
when we had tidings that all the malignants in Worcestershire,
with the Cavaliers, were got into Worcester and fortified
themselves, whereupon we marched six miles unto Baggington,
within two miles of Coventry. This night the rest of our
regiments quartered about the
<P 18>
country. Wednesday morning we marched towards Warwick, leaving
Killingworth Castle upon the right, and after we had marched six
miles our forces met again and quartered before Warwick, until
forty pieces of ordnance, with other carriages, passed by, in
which time I viewed the antiquities on this side Warwick, as
S=r= Guy's Cave, his chapel, and his picture in it; his stables
all hewed out of the main rock, as also his garden and two
springing wells whereat he drank, as is reported. From hence our
regiment marched through Warwick in such haste that I could not
view the town, but had only a sight of the castle, which is very
strong, built upon a mighty rock, whereof there are store in
this country. This night we marched two miles further unto
Burford, where our quarter was as constantly since his
Excellency's coming. It is very poor, for many of our soldiers
can get neither beds, bread, nor water, which makes them grow
very strong, for backbiters have been seen to march upon some of
them six on breast and eight deep at their open order, and I
fear I shall be in the same condition e'er long, for we can get
no carriage for officers, so that my trunk is more slighted than
any other, which is occasioned, as I conceive, partly by the
false informations of Lieut.-Col. Briddeman and our late
Serjeant Major General Ballard, profane wretches; but chiefly
for want of our Colonel, who should be one of the Council of
War, at which Council we have none to plead for us or remove
false aspersions cast upon us, in so much that I have heard some
of our captains repent their coming forth, and all for want of a
Colonel. Thursday morning we marched in the front four miles
towards Worcester, where we met one riding post from Worcester,
informing us that our troops and the cavaliers were there in
fight; but it was false, only to hast the captains from Warwick.
Upon this report our whole regiment ran shouting for two miles
together, and crying "To Worcester, to Worcester," and desired
to march all night: but after we had marched two miles further
we were commanded to stand until our forces passed by, and then
marched two miles further unto Assincantlo, where we could get
no quarter, neither bread nor drink, by reason of the Lord
Compton's late being there. Friday we marched four miles on this
side Worcester, but our soldiers cried out for one hour together
to go forward to set upon the enemy, but could get no
commission. This day we had such foul weather that before I had
marched one mile I was wet to the skin. This day our horse
forces, namely, Sir William Belford, Col. Sands, Col. Vines,
Col. Clarke, Major Duglas, kept all the passages over Severne,
and by that means kept in the Cavaliers, who often assayed to
fly, but were repelled. Those commanders sent to His Excellency
for three field pieces, and offered with them to keep them in on
that side untill we had surrounded them: but they were denied
this day. Towards even
<P 19>
Prince Robert entered the city at a bye passage with eighteen
troops of horse, most of the city crying "Welcome, welcome," but
principally the mayor, who desired to entertain him; but he
answered, "God damn him, he would not stay, but would go wash
his hands in the blood of the Roundheads," and immediately set
some to lye in ambush, and with the rest sallied out upon our
forces; and immediately Col. Sands came on bravely, even unto
the breast of their chief commander, and discharged. The rest
undauntedly followed, but their forces immediately fled, and
ours followed them, and by the ambushment were beset before and
behind, so that the battle was very hot, and many fell on both
sides. Some of our chief commanders, as Col. Sands and Duglas,
was wounded, and are since both dead. The chief amongst the
Cavaliers were Prince Robert, who, I hear, was wounded, the Lord
Craven, and the Lord of Northampton. Our wounded men they
brought into the city, and stripped, stabbed, and slashed their
dead bodies in a most barbarous manner, and imbrued their hands
in their blood. They also at their return met a young gentleman,
a Parliament man, as I am informed - his name I cannot learn -
and stabbed him on horseback with many wounds, and trampled upon
him, and also most maliciously shot his horse. This even, our
general's troop of gentlemen, going to quarter themselves about
the country, were betrayed and beset by the enemy, and, overmuch
timorous, immediately fled so confusedly that some broke their
horses' necks, others their own; some were taken, others slain;
and scarce half of them escaped; which is such a blot upon them
as nothing but some desperate exploit will wipe off. Hearing
this news, we immediately cried out to march unto them, and
forthwith drew out a forlorn hope - some out of every company -
and sent them before, intending to march after them; but about
eleven of the clock, the enemies fled, and our hope returned.
Here we abode all night, where we had small comfort, for it
rained hard. Our food was fruit, for those who could get it; our
drink, water; our beds, the earth; our canopy, the clouds; but
we pulled up the hedges, pales, and gates, and made good fires:
his Excellency promising us that, if the country relieved us not
the day following, he would fire their towns. Thus we continued
singing of psalms until the morning. Saturday morning we marched
into Worcester - our regiment in the rear of the waggons - the
rain continuing the whole day, and the way so base that we went
up to the ancles in thick clay; and, about four of the clock
after noon, entred the city, where we found twenty-eight dead
men, which we buried - some of them Cavaliers - and these were
all that we can find slain on our side. This even, by lot, our
company watched one of the gates, and also the day following,
until even. This even his Excellency's guard entred the mayor's
house, and toke him prisoner,
<P 20>
who is now more guarded than regarded. Sabbath day morning our
soldiers entered a vault of the Colledge, where his Excellency
was to hear a sermon, and found eleven barrels of gunpowder and
a pot of bullets. This day Mr. Marshall Sedgewick, &c. preached
about the city, but I, being upon the court of guard, could not
heare them. This even his Excellency proclaimed that no soldier
should plunder either church or private house, upon pain of
death. We shortly expect a pitched battle, which, if the
Cavaliers will but stand, will be very hot; for we are all much
enraged against them for their barbarisms, and shall shew them
little mercy. But I want time to enlarge myself. To conclude, I
humbly entreat you to present my humble service to my Mrs., as
also Mr. Edgerton's, our quartermaster, and mine to Mr. Molloyne
and his wife; my service also to my aunt, Mr. Priaux, Mr.
Simpson and his wife, Mr. Hawkins, Mr. Starkey; and I humbly
intreate, let me hear from you of your welfare, my mistress, and
your family. Sir, it is extreme hast that makes me compose so
confusedly; and, therefore, with my service to Mrs. Elizabeth,
Anna, John, and little Samuel, and my love to all my fellow
servants, I rest yours in all good services, until death,
   Nehemiah Wharton.
   My captain presents you with his best respects, and drinks to
you every day we sit at table together. I have received your
feather, for which I give you humble thanks.
   Worcester, Sept. 26, 1642.

<Q WHA 1642 NWHARTON>
<A NEHEMIAH WHARTON>
<G M>
<P 20>
[} [\VIII.\] }] [^NEHEMIAH WHARTON TO GEORGE WILLINGHAM^]
   My much honored Mr. I humbly greete you. My last unto you was
Sept. 26th, in which there were some errors, occasioned partly
by my over hastinesse in wrightinge, for the bearer promised me
to deliver it on Wensday, Sept. the 28th, partly by the various
relations dyspersed, but chiefly by reason I was upon the guard,
and upon paine of death durst not stir from it to se or heare
any occurrences; but I had as good intelligence as the city then
afforded, for the trueth of thinges was not then knowne. The
errors are these. First, I wrote that the Earle of Northampton
and the Lord Craven were with the Prince, but they were not; but
upon sufficient information they were these, Prince Robert, Duke
Mawrice, the Lord Digby, Commissary Wilmot, Sir Lewes Dives, Sir
William
<P 21>
Russell, and Mr. Hastings. A second was, that most of the
curoseers, his Excellencies trope, were cut off, but they are
since returned and but few lost, but doe still beare the
aspersion of cowards. The third was, that Colonell Sands was
dead; but both he and Captain Sands, though both wounded, yet
are still livinge. But, that I may not trouble you with common
relations, which commonly are fictions, I have conferred with
commaunders, the best intelligencers, and have also veiwed the
place where the battaile was fought, but briefly. Worcestershire
is a pleasaunt, fruitfull, and rich countrey, aboundinge in
corne, woods, pastures, hills, and valleyes, every hedge and
heigh way beset with fruits, but especially with peares, whereof
they make that pleasant drinke called perry, w=ch= they sell for
a penny a quart, though better then ever you tasted at London.
Touchinge the city, it is more large than any I have seene since
I left London, and like London it abounds in outward thinges of
all kinds, but for want of the Word the people perrish. It is
pleasantly seated, exceedingly populous, and doubtles very rich.
It is situate on the east bank of that famous river Severne. The
wall in the forme of a triangle, the gates seaven, the bulwarkes
five, but much decayed: no castle, only a mount of earth. In
this citty there is a very stately cathedrall, called S=t=.
Maries, in which there are many stately monuments; but amongst
the rest, in the middle of the quire, is the monument of Kinge
John, all of white marble, with his picture thereon to the life.
On the south side, Kinge Arthur's tombe, of jette, but no
picture thereon. This citty hath also a stronge stone bridge
over Severne, consistinge of sixe arches, with a gate in the
middle of the bridge, as stronge as that on London Bridge, with
a percullis. Five miles upon the left of this is Maluern Hills,
which, for height and length and breadth, doe many degrees
exceede all that ever I see. I nominate them because they are
famous, for on the top of them there is a very brave chase for
many miles together, a large ditch, and springs also, all on the
very top. Betweene these hills and the river was the late
skirmish, about one mile from the city, which was in this
manner: - Our troopes on that side were devided to keepe the
severall passages, and Colonell Sands, Colonell Vines, and
Sergeant-Major Duglas, with their troopes, were set to keep this
passage, which was at the end of a narrow lane, which the
treacherous inhabitants neare them discovered to the Prince, and
he forthwith set some troopes to lye in ambush, who brake downe
a hedge and lay in a feild on the right of them; the treacherous
citizens attending them in multitudes with muskets, who lay on
each side the hedge. This done, the Prince with other forces
went
<P 22>
to meete them, but first sent a false alarum, informinge them
that the Cavalleeres weere all fled and had left the citty, and
also that his Excellency was come even to the gates, and
immediately these three troopes poasted away to meet his
Excellency, for Sir William Belfore, Colonell Clarke, and our
other commaunders, heard not of it, but hastinge downe a narrow
lane the Prince met them. Colonell Sands beinge in the front,
the Prince asked him whom he was for, he answered "For Kinge and
Parliament." He replyed, "Not for the Kinge alone?" He answered,
"No." Then said the Prince, "For the King have at you." The
Colonell answered, "For the Parliament have at you." And so they
discharged each at other. The rest followed them, and presently
those in ambush fired upon them, as also the musqetteers behind
the hedges. The horsemen charged not the second time, but
immediately fell to their swords, so that for the space of
almost an hour the skirmishe was excedinge hot. This relation I
had from an gentleman that was in the front of the battel, and
was wounded with the sword and bullets in seaven severall
places, was stripped naked, and yet liveth. He affermeth that,
though there were ten for one, yet there were more slaine and
wounded of them then of us; and I spake with one that heard the
Prince, at his returne, say, that our men fought more like lions
then men. Our wounded commaunders he brought into the city, and
gave commaund that they should be carefully looked unto, and
with all speed gathered his forces together and fled, leavinge
all their reconinge to pay; in some places twenty pounde, in
others ten, in some more, some lesse, pretendinge and also
promising to returne. Since their departure we heare that the
Prince is wounded, but it is certaine Duke Maurice is mortally
wounded. They report unto the Kinge that they have slaine eight
hundred of our men, when there were but twenty-eight slaine in
all, and some of them were Cavalleeres; of this I am certaine,
for I told all their gunnes, and searched the register of St.
Jones parrish, where they were all buried. They boast
wonderfully, and sweare most hellishly, that the next time they
meete us they will make but a mouthfull of us; but I am
persuaded the Lord hath given them this small victory, that they
may, in the day of battell, come on more presumptuously to thir
owne destruction, in which battell, though I and many thousand
more may be cut off, yet I am confident the Lord of Hoasts will
in the end triumph gloriously over these horses and all their
cursed riders. They left, at their flight, in the city, some
horses, truncks, and other thinges, all which his Excellency
hath seized on. Colonell Essex is made governor of this citty,
and his regiment shall be garisons here.
   Sir, our army did little thinke ever to have seene Worcester,
but the providence of God hath brought us heither, and had it
not, the city is so vile, and the country
<P 23>
so base, papisticall, and atheisticall and abominable, that it
resembles Sodom, and is the very embleme of Gomorrah, and
doubtlesse it would have ben worse than either Algiers or Malta,
a very den of thieves, and refuge for all the hel-hounds in the
countrey; I should have said in the land; but we have handsomely
handled some of them, and doe cull out the rest as fast as we
can, who verbally cry (\peccavi\) , but cordially (\iterum
faciam\) , and indeed they do as they are taught by Dr. Prediux,
late madd By Shop, and other popish priests, who are all run
awaye. To conclude, Monday, Sept. 26th, one of Prince Robert's
trumpeters came to our gates and sounded a point of warre, who
was presently taken and led blindfold through the city unto his
Excellency. This night Sargeant Major Duglas was nobly buried.
Tuesday our soildiers, by commission from his Excellency,
marched seven miles to Sir William Russell's house, and pillaged
it unto the bare walls. Wensday we fasted, and Mr. Obbadiah
Sedgwick preached unto us, whom the Lord extraordinarily
assisted, so that his doctrine wrought wonderfully upon many of
us, and doubtless hath fitted many of us for death, which we all
shortly expect. Thursday his Excellency proclaimed that
whosoever had any goods of the Cavalleers in custody should
forthwith surrender them this day. I met with your servant
Barry, who is in good health, with his horse. He was on the west
of Severne, near the battell, but untill it was ended heard not
of it. Wee joyntly present you and my Mrs. with our humble
service, as also Mr. Willingham, your brother, with his family.
Mr. Chappel's man and I do present our service to Mr. Chappell
and his wife, Mr. Felton and his wife, and desire to heare of
their welfare. Fryday morninge our drummes beat for our regiment
to march away, but wheither I know not. Wee should bee very glad
to see our colonell. Sir, I humbly intreate to excuse my late
errours, and to accept these my pore indeavors, beinge the last
I suppose that ever I shall present unto you. Thus, with my
dearest love to all your children and my fellow servants,
wheither with you or from you, beinge to march away in hast, I
must conclude your everlovinge, humble, thankfull, and antient
servant,
   Nehemiah Wharton.
   Worcester, Sept. the 30th, 1642.



<B HAMILTON>

[^THE HAMILTON PAPERS: BEING SELECTIONS FROM ORIGINAL LETTERS IN
THE POSSESSION OF HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF HAMILTON AND BRANDON,
RELATING TO THE YEARS 1638-1650. ED. BY GARDINER, SAMUEL RAWSON.
CAMDEN NEW SERIES 27. 1880.^]

<Q HAM 1648 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 232>
[} [\154. THE PRINCE OF WALES TO THE DUKE OF HAMILTON AND
OTHERS. 1648, JULY 26.\] }]
Charles P.
   Right trustie and right intirely beloued cousin, and right
trustie and right well beloued cousins, wee greet you well. Wee
soe earnestly desire to bee in person present amongst you that
wee shall with some impatience expect your Commissioners upon
the subject of Sir William Flemmings instructions, and in the
meane tyme wee intend to imploy ourselfe att sea aboard the
fleete, as the best expedient wee can for the present make use
of to oppose the common enemie, both to us and you. In all other
things wee intreat you to giue full creditt to this bearer, M=r=
William Murray, as to a person perfectly instructed in our
affaires, and intirely trusted by us.
   Giuen under our hand and seale att Helford Sluce the 26=th=
of July, in the 24=th= yeare of the raigne of our Royall Father
the King.
[\ADDRESSED:\] - To our right trustie and right intirely beloued
cousin James Duke of Hamilton, and to our right trustie and well
beloued cousins the Earle of Lindsey, the Earle of Lauderdail,
the Earle of Lanerick, and the Earle of Kalandar.

<Q HAM 1650 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 254>
[} [\172. CHARLES II. TO THE DUKE OF HAMILTON. 1650, FEB.
2/12.\] }]
My Lord Hamleton,
   I have sent you the garter by Tom Bray, and shall say noe
more to you upon that subject then what is conteyned in my
publique letter. I have likewise lately advertised you that I
intend to be shortly at Breda for a new treaty with my subjects
of Scotland, and I cannot doubt but that you will contribute all
you may to the good successe thereof and doe me all other
faithfull service in your power, as I shall endeavour to provide
for you and for all those honest men that engaged for my father
with your brother and yourselfe, whereof I intreate you to be
fully assured, and that I am
   Your very affectionate friend,
   Charles R.
Jersey, the 12/2 of Febra, 1649.

<Q HAM 1650 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 254>
[} [\173. CHARLES II. TO THE DUKE OF HAMILTON. 1650. JULY 17.\]
}]
My Lord Hamilton,
   I am sure there is no body that is more conserned with the
ridgedness of this Kerke and State towards you then I am, and I
desire you to lett me know if I can doe anything that may take
off their cruelty, either by writing or any way else. Pray lett
all your frinds know how sensible I am of their sufferings,
knowing it is only for my sake, and that I am very much grived
that I am not in a better condition to lett them see it, but I
hope myne will mend, and then I am sure there's shall be better.
The Docter has accquainted me with the busines concerning S=r=
J. Scot. I doe assure you I will doe nothing in it but what you
shall directe me in. In this and in all things else you shall
ever find me to be
   Your most affectionate frinde,
   Charles R.
Falkland, July 17, [\1650.\]

<Q HAM 1650 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 255>
[} [\174. CHARLES II. TO THE DUKE OF HAMILTON. 1650, AUG. 6\] }]
   132. Aug. 6.
   I had written to you before now to lett you know I had
receaved yours of the 23 July if I had not bine in the army, and
evre since I came hether I have bine so narowly wached by the
severe Christans that I could not answer your letter before now.
I thanke you for the care you have of my person, but indeed I
thinke I had bine as saffe in the army as heere, for the
soldiers were so kind to me upon my first comeng that the next
day affter the comission of the Kirke desired me to retire out
of the army, pretending it was for the saffty of my person, but
indeed it was for feare that I should gett toe great an interest
with the soldiers. I have commanded 163 to give you a particular
account of all. I shall now only aske your opinion in two thins,
the first is 281: 192: 258: 91: 308: 100: 379: 3: 108: 327: 13:
whether it were not 6: 70: 199: 65: 330: 153: 237: 56: 190: 329:
290: 38: 3. The other is what should be done 302: 192: 353: 308:
106: 108: 17: 120. I hope you stay where you are will not be
long. I am sure I shall doe all I can that I may haue your
company againe, which is very much wished for.
   Your most affectionate friend,
   C. R.

<Q HAM 1650 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 255>
[} [\175. CHARLES II. TO THE DUKE OF HAMILTON. 1650, AUG. 14.\]
}]
   Aug. 14.
   I Have sent this bearer 270: 16: 135: 9: 190: to acquaint you
with my condition. I desire you to give him credite in what he
shall say to you. I entreate you to send me your opinion as
soone as you can, what I ought to doe. I dare not say any more
for they are so watchful over me that I doe nothing but they
observe it.

<Q HAM 1650 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 256>
[} [\176. CHARLES II. TO THE DUKE OF HAMILTON. 1650, AUG. 31.\]
}]
   Aug. 31.
   I have receaved your letters by him I sent to you, but I have
not had time to answer them before now; nor can I answer you in
all the particulars, but must referr you to 163, who will give
you a particular account of all. I am extremely sensible of the
kind offer you made me in your letter, but I doe not think it
fitt to hazard your selfe upon so small an occasion, when it may
be done without it; howsoever I have the same obligation to you
as if you had don it. Concerning 331: 288: 198: 196: 6: 190: 22:
58: 135: 256: 58: 256: 380: 55: I desire you to direct me which
is the best and safest way, because I doe not know who to imploy
without suspition. I was thinking if you should send to 22 about
it as being the proper person, but I shall leave it to you, and
doe as you direct me, being one that I have so much confidence
in.

<Q HAM 1650 CHARLES2>
<A CHARLES II>
<G M>
<P 256>
[} [\177. CHARLES II. TO THE DUKE OF HAMILTON. 1650. Sept. 27.\]
}]
   Sept. 27.
   I have at last resolved that 85: 237: 70: 9: 50: 40: 384: 4:
10: 308: 290: 304: by the 174: 26: 82: 15: 30: 8: 3: you will
receive the particulars from 122 and 223, and the reasons of it.
I shall desire you to be thinking of preparing yourselfe 281:
329: 165: 244: 9: 4: 65: 56: 324: for to get you 20: 174: 36: 9:
40: 13: 15: 38: 61: 195: 289: 4: 5: 384: 380: 10: and for feare
that our masters should have some design against your person,
which I am very much concerned for, I entreate you therefore to
have a great care of that, and be assured that in what condition
soever I am in I will ever be
   Your most affectionate frind.



<B JONES>

[^INEDITED LETTERS OF CROMWELL, COLONEL JONES, BRADSHAW AND
OTHER REGICIDES. ED. BY MAYER, JOSEPH. TRANSACTIONS OF THE
HISTORIC SOCIETY OF LANCASHIRE AND CHESHIRE NEW SERIES 1.
1861.^]

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 178>
[^JOHN JONES TO EDMUND LUDLOW^]
   (Col=l= Jones) To Leift. gen=ll= Ludlow.
Dear S=r=
   I have to present but my reall affec~cens, and my hearty
desire of enjoying yo=r= Company, and if I had a Call from the
place for it where you are, I should gladly embrace it, and
share in yo=r= hardshipp with you. The inclosed contains all the
newes wee have here. The Lord is gratious in his Dealing towards
us, mixing grains of crosses and affic~cons w=th= oceans of
mercies and deliverances, that o=r= low spirits are apt to grow
regardles of the manifestacions of his love when we enjoy them
in a continued series, may have the more quicker and more
feeling apprehensions of them. I am sorry w=th= all my soule,
that wee are fayne to give my Lord soe sad an accompt of his
affairs in these parts. We have Job's messengers from most
precincts of the defects and fayler of assessments for pay of
the Forces assigned to each precinct, and the fayler is in this
precinct more than in any, and yet wee doo not know of any money
assigned from England for this place, save the 2500 (^l^) and
the 1639, men~coned in my Lords' Papers, sent him: Whereof 4000
(^l^) was taken up long since by Bills of Exchange, and wholly
issued out. The rest (I hope) not yet come over, for if it bee
it is wholly spent. The accompt of that cash wee have not,
because the Deputy Tr'er is gone for England when wee were in
the North. We have made this morning inquiry what cash wee have
in all Treasuries heere, all the stock wee have is about 2500
(^l^) in the Receipts of Customes and excise, whereof we now
fayne to issue out this day 1000 (^l^) to provide corne for y=e=
forces in the feild, and to pay some troopes that were much in
arrears. This is the last dropp of oyle in o=r= cruce, and that
being spent wee know not what to doe. Want comes upon us like an
armed mann, but o=r= gracious God is all sufficient, and when
wee are in our greatest streights he
<P 179>
will bring deliverance. I had communicated what I write to you
to my Lord, but that I was to trouble him by my particular
relation, you may doe what you please therein. I am glad soe
much of my Lord's company, truly my affeccons are very warme
towards him. I thinke the Earth doeth not beare a more meeke,
upright heart towards God than he, if any thing bee amisse in
him, it is his being (\nimis\) exact as it idolizing the best
morall vertue, Justice. It is a blessed thing to have
congregac~on and fellowship w=th= such. I beg y=r= favo=r= to
present my humble service to S=r= Hardres Waller, and Col.
Cromwell, and favourably esteeme this trouble put upon you by
   Yo=r= faithfull friend and humble Servant,
   Jo. Jones.
My services to Mr. Corbett. Yo=r= houses are in good care, and
all well at your house. The sickness decreases, 36 this week of
all Diseases. Dublin, 3=d= September, 1651.

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 179>
[^JOHN JONES TO GENERAL ALLEN^]
   To Agitant Gen=ll= Allen,
Deare S=r=
   It is a happy acquaintance that is founded in a Gospelle
accompt, and although I am one of the least, and the latest,
that can challenge that w=th= you, yet since I have known yo=r=
Xtian spirit, and temper to be such, I have rejoyced in my
hearte to consider the faithfullness of our Father, who hath
said that he is noe respecter of Persons, but pulleth downe y=e=
proud from their seates, and exalteth the humble and meeke,
w=ch= he hath not onely made good in o=r= dayes, whereof we are
wittnesses, but he hath raised poor sinfull Creatures, above
their spheares in the Affaires of the World, that they might be
humble and meeke: This may seeme a Paradoxe, but it is very
true. I may say
<P 180>
that I have bene in that condic~ion, as was scarce capable
exercising that grace of humility in the outward conversac~on,
untill the Lord was pleased to bring me out of it. The Lord
grant us more discovery of his eternall love every Day, and
keeping us from waxing fatt (as Jossuram), and forgetting our
God that formed us, or lightly esteeming of the Rock of o=r=
Salvation. He hath planted his word in o=r= hearts y=t= wee may
doe it; and this doeing is comprehended in very few (but very
sweet) words - "to doe justly, to love mercy, and to walke
humbly w=th= o=r= God." Mich. 6, 8. Oh, that o=r= Spirits were
continually bathed in that everlasting fountain of love, that
wee might continually bee breathing out that love, for
refreshing hungry, barren soules! The Lord hath given you a
talent, whereof you are to give an accompt. Examine well whether
you are as frequent in speaking a word of exhortac~on in
publiq=e= for the helpe of simple ignorant souldiers as
formerly, and if not, see that you have a good warrant for it.
We must be alwayes listning behinde us, for that word w=ch= is
promised in Esaiah 30, 21, saying, "this is the way, walke in
it." My purpose was to thank you for yo=r= kind l=res= w=ch=
came to o=r= hands long since, w=ch= the Com=r= tooke very
kindly, although they contained noe other matter but a
representa~cion of yo=r= Respects. His little Majesty of
Scotland, w=th= an army of 12,000 horse and foote, 20th of last
month in Shropshire; Lambert and Harrison, w=th= a considerable
strength of horse and dragoons, but few foot, in Leitchfield;
the Lord gen=ll= within 3 dayes march w=th= the Infantry and
Trayne; Fleetwood w=th= some force coming up - this is o=r= last
intelligence from England. The Lord give us believing and
praying spirits. On the last Lord's day Sherlock, with 150 horse
and 30 dragoons, preyed the cattle of this towne of Baggotts
Rath; L=t= Howlitt, of Col=l= Howson Troope, got together 40 of
his horse and as
<P 181>
many of the Towne horse, and pursued 5 miles, and there engaged
upon a disadavantage of number and ground, and was imediately
worsted, himselfe wounded, 25 slayne, and Capt=n= Lankey w=th=
21 more men were taken prisoners. Wee lost in the service and
prey about 100 serviceable horse, y=e= draught oxen, and 130
cowes; I lost an horseman and my best horse. The enemy grow in
these partes into a considerable strength, and are much
heightened in their spirits, but the cursed thing stickes to
them. They abound in oathes and hideous blasphemies, they have
Pharaoh's heart to destroy God's people: who knowes but that
their spirits are raised to draw them together to destroy them?
The Lord's judgm=ts= are unsearchable, and his wayes past
finding out. I pray present my humble service to Col=l=
Cromwell, Dr. Chartwright, whose kindness I shall never forgett,
and the rest of my acquaintanee where you are. The God of peace,
who hath brought againe the Lord Jesus from the Dead by the
blood of the everlasting couvn=t=, make you perfect in every
good worke.
   Yo=r= very affectionate Friend,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, September 3rd, 1651.

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 181>
[^JOHN JONES TO HENRY JONES^]
To Mr. Henry Jones, Scout M=r= Gene=ll=
Honoured S=r=
   I have had a sight of yo=r= intelligence to Aldr~an
Hutchinson, and therein of your kind Remembrance of me, for
w=ch= I cordially thanke you; and give me leave a little, as one
that doeth love and hono=r= you, to be free in my weake advice.
There be some that doe take notice how you doe write yo=r= name,
and from thence make some conclus~ons to yo=r= prejudice, as the
affecting of Titular Dignityes, although empty and scandalous
and serving noe end
<P 182>
but that of Pride and vaine glory, w=ch= God in o=r= time beares
testimony ag=t= or els the opinion of a divine Right in that
order w=th= yo=r= conscience will not give you leave to lay
aside, although you fight ag=t= the uphold=r= of those kind of
ordo=r=. When you have leisure I would wish you would some time
write to the Com=rs= of the affaires where you are, yo=rs= when
it comes being very exact and satisfactory, it will be well
taken, and cannot be any diservice to you. The last Lord's Day
Sherlock, with 150 horse and 30 firelocks, came to Baggots Rath
and preyed the cattle and horses, to the number of 120 cowes and
40 horses, and Cap=t= Howlett, w=th= about 40 of his owne horse
and about as many of the towne horse, pursued 5 miles, and was
worsted, lost about 25 slayne and 22 taken prisoners. The Lord
discov=r= unto us his mind in these his dealings towards us. I
have noe more at present, but to assure you that I am,
   Yo=r= affeccionate Friend and Kinsman,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 3=d= September, 1651.
Postcript.
Mr. Henry Jones, Scout M=r= Gen=ll=
   Mr. Scott now supplies the office of the Secretary of State,
at the Councell of State, desires me to have timely intelligence
of all passages, and intellegenc=es= of concernm=t=, and hath
intrusted and desired me to procure him such. If you please to
furnish us w=th= what occurres to you, it wilbee a speciall
favo=r= to us; both if there be any appearances of crosse
Interests growing amongst o=r= Friends, it is good it should be
timely observed and made known, to prevent the mischiefes y=t=
often happen among prevailing parties occasioned by such
Interests. If you bee at any charge in conveying such
Intelligence, it shalbee repayed by
   Yo=r= affeccionate Friend and Kinsman,
   Jo. Jones.
I was fayne to breake open the l=re= to put in this postscript.

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 183>
[^JOHN JONES TO MORGAN LLOYD^]
   To M=r= Morgan Lloyd.
Dearly beloved in the Lord Jesus.
   It pleaseth the Lord to exercise his poore creatures under
various dispensac~ons, and all to bring his owne glorious
purposes to passe, for good to them that are called according to
his purpose, Rom. 8. 28. Att this time, when the mouthes and
hearts of all the S'=ts= are filled w=th= songs of deliverance,
the Lord hath bene pleased to visit my poore family with sad
afflic~cons, my deare wife being brought by sicknes to soe low a
condic~on, as made those about her to judge that her course was
finished, but the angel of his presence was with her, bearing up
her spirit in the full assurance of his eternall love, and the
spiritts of the S'=ts= very active in their Addresses at the
Throne of grace for her. In the middest of her weaknes yo=r=
l'=res= of the 17th of the last moneth came to our hand, wherein
shee did very much rejoyce, causing them to be read over and
over in the presence of such as came to visit her, and rejoycing
in yo=r= sweet Reproofes, and wishing that her heart and theirs
who informed were layd open before you, to remove such hard
thoughts as you might have of her. And if it became me to plead
in his Justificac~on comparatively (for what flesh can be
justified from any one sin) I might instance many arguments to
evince her indisposition to height and priority, even almost to
rediculousnes in respect of o=r= conversac~on in the world, and
deportments proper to particular stations, consistent w=th=
religious observances, by such as bore that testimony to you of
her, if I guesse the party aright they might have testifyed her
tenderness of them, using them more like children than servants,
endeavouring to cover infirmities, and not denude them. Passion
is an unbridled monster, w=ch= many a gracious soule cannot
governe. 
   Although it hath pleased the Lord to exalt himself above
<P 184>
the nations in England and Scotland by casting downe the power
of the Earth, and giving his S=ts= hono=r= to bind kings in
chains, and nobles in fetters of iron, yet here wee labour under
more darke appearances, our God in his wisdome permitting the
enemy to grow numerous, insolent, and bould about 10 days since.
They tooke the towne of Rosse, (except y=e= church, and a house,
which was fortifyed) plundered it, and made the inhabitants pay
700 (^l^) to save it from burning, and they quitted it upon
approach of some of our forces that way. They have forced
severall small garrisons, they dayly waste and burne our
quarters, and take the opportunity to com~itt all the wickedness
Sathan can invent, while the maine of our forces are ingaged in
the seige of Limerick and Galloway. And all this to teach us
that he is the Author of those great workes he hath done of
late, whereof wee are witnesses. 2=dly= to humble o=r= selves
under the mighty hand of God, who cann in a moment dash in
pieces all the nations of the earth. 3=dly= that wee are in his
hand as the clay in the potter's hand, it is he that gives
courage, and casts downe the spirits of men. 4=thly= That if wee
goe not out in the strength of our God, the ashes off o=r=
enemies ruine is sufficient to destroy us. Wee have here some
few S'=ts= who thirst after the water of Life, and long for more
discoveries of o=r= everlasting bridgroome's love, and for more
enjoym=ts= of his blessed presence, and if the Lord would open a
way would much rejoyce in yo=r= company and help, although yo=r=
stay should not be long. Here is worke for you and deare M=r=
Powell, and some more of our British Nuntios to divulge the
bridgroome's message, and make knowne y=e= mistery of that union
that is betweene y=e= bride and her head X=t= Jesus, and what is
y=e= brightnes of the father's glory.
   Wee are here much under the letter of gospel dispensac~ons
mingled with clay - humane prudence, weaksighted,
<P 185>
not able to behold the native brightnes of the Sun of
Righteousnes. The inclosed paper may inform you how seasonable
yo=r= presence had beene w=th= us at this time, or may be yet.
   What becomes of poore Merionethshire, is that countrey denied
the tender of gospell mercies? Is there no prophet, noe
messenger of X=t= y=t= will make Duffryn Ardidwey in his way?
Where is M=r= Powell, M Lloyd, &c., that once thought it a
mercy, and a high priviledge, to bee accompted worthy of being
driven to the mountaynes, and desolate places, that they might
have liberty to preach the Gospell there. Yo=r= office and duty
is to encounter w=th= sinn and the power of the prince of the
ayre, and where is there more sin~e to encounter w=th= where
more ignorance, where more hatred to the people of God? where
the word saint more scorned? than in Merionethshire. The more
the difficulty and opposition, the more is the power of the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus in gospell administrac~ons manifested
and the instruments hono=ed= I dare not goe no further then
Queres in this matter, not knowing where the weight of y=e=
worke lies. I am now called away, my deare Love to yo=r= Wife,
and y=e= rest of o=r= Xtian friends where you are.
   Yo=r= unworthy brother
   in the Lord Jesus.
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 9=d= 8=m= 1651.
I desire to be remembred to M=r= Baker, & his wife, w=th= thanks
for their kind enterteynm=ts=

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 185>
[^JOHN JONES TO THEOPHILUS JONES^]
   To S=r= Theoph. Jones.
Deare S=r=
   I have seen an expression of yo=rs= in Major Cadwyan's
l'=re=, w=ch= layd upon mee a deepe obligac~on of thankfulness
<P 186>
for yo=r= respects, but it carries w=th= it too great a weight
for acceptac~on, by one soe little meriting. Letters from
Chester and Beumaris brings the most acceptable newes y=t= ever
wee had of God's crowning mercies, and seasonable Deliverance,
promiseing a period to our troubles: The totall overthrow of
Scotts P=r=tend=er= and all his Forces, not in a blow (w=ch=
might be ascribed to chance by those that have noe other God to
attribute to) but in a series of successes that his purpose
might be seene (who disposeth of all powers) to make this the
time of finishing o=r= troubles, in England and Scotland. I
shall onely menc~on some, Sterlin Castle, a place of impregnable
strength, having in it 40 peices of ordnances, provisions for
500 men a yeare, 5000 armes, great store of powder, Claret Wine,
Strong Water, &c., was in less than one day storming with gunnes
and morter pieces, delivered to Leif=t= Gen=ll= Monk. E. of
Derby was left in Lanc=re= to raise the countrey, and had got
together 1500, was by Col. Lilbourne w=th= his horse, and some
foote from Chester, in his own countrey, defeated. S=r= Thomas
Tildsley, Lo=r= Witherington, Col. Ashurst, and many other
persons of quality, and 500 more slayne and taken, himself
wounded, escaping to his king's army, w=ch= army being lodged at
Worcester, was on this day seavenight engaged by the Lord
Gen=ll= and his forces, and totally routed. The foote reported
all to be put to the sword, and 4 or 5000 horse, as my letter
sayeth taken, the rest scattered, not then known. Darbey, and
the Lord Lowtherdale w=th= a party made northward, and in
Sherropshire were met w=th= and both of them taken. The citty
and country did vanimously raise, and in great strength to
oppose this pretender, and one of my l'=res= menc~ons, That y=e=
Lord Gen=ll= had 40000 men come to him, but dismissed above
20000 of them. The countrey sent in provisions, and fresh
horses, for his army w=th=out number as the letter menc~ons.
<P 187>
   M=r= Lowe and M=r= Gibbons were both executed att Tower Hill,
about 3 weekes since. M=r= Scott hath desired the safe
conveighance of the inclosed by your hand, and I desire you to
intimate to the gentlemen from mee, that he shall find those
favo=rs= and respects he so justly meritts, and may expect made
good with him, so far as my interest may carry things to his
advantage w=ch= I had written to him my selfe, but that I am not
knowne unto him. My humble services to yo=r= sweete Lady.
   Yo=r= very affectionate Cousin to serve you,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 10=th= Sep=th= 1651
In this Letter was inclosed the w=th=in mentioned l'=re=, and
dirrected thus - for my very worthy friend M=r= Terence Coglan,
at Killolgan, in the Kings County, Ireland.
[^LIST OF LETTERS SENT OMITTED^]

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 187>
[^JOHN JONES TO THOMAS SCOTT^]
   To Thomas Scott, Esq.
Deare S=r=
   Yo=rs= with an inclosed to M=r= Terence Coghland, came to my
hands about 6 days since. The inclosed I have safely conveighed
to S=r= Theophilus Jones, and because my name was not knowne to
the Gentleman, I have written to S=r= Theophilus Jones to
intimate to him from me, That he shall find the favo=rs= and
respects he justly merits, and may
<P 188>
expect made good unto him soe far as my Interest may carry
things to his advantage. It is probable I shall hear shortly
from him upon that account, because I find the Irish not apt to
play an after game in Curteseyes, and Trustings. The menc~on you
made of Majo=r= Sallwey, made my heart Leape w=th=in me, he
being by the printed Diurnalls rendered to bee past hope of
Recovery. Blessed bee the Lord for his kindnes to him in that
particular and to=r= Land and Nation in his appearances, and
actings, for, and by his Servants at Worcester. The Lord give us
humble, thankfull, uniting, beleeving, and, selfe-denying
spirits, That wee fall not into the snares that successes have
in them, to lift us up to Pride, allure us to coveteousnes, or
rend us into Factions. I should thinke it now very seasonable to
passe an Act of Gen=ll= Indempnity, w=th= exceptions of all
Persons that banished themselves by flying beyond Seas, and all
that joyned w=th= the Irish Rebells and some other notorious
Persons and w=th= other Limitac~ons, as to bearing of Offices in
the Majstracy, That kind of inquisition of Discovering
Delinquents, &c., hath bene long enough on foote as to the first
and second Warr, and the unanimous Risings of the Countrey to
oppose the Comon Enemy, may meritt some considerac~on.
   Yo=r= affairs heere are in exceeding low condic~on, as the
Papers sent the Councell will Demonstrate, and yet those papers
doe not represent them as badd as they are. If money come not to
Dublin speedily or wee be impowered to charge the Treas=y= with
Bills of Exchange, truely wee know not what to doe. [^A PASSAGE
PROBABLY OMITTED^] And yet I could wish, that many more forces
were brought over hither commanded by honest, Religious
Officers, to finish this worke effectually, and raise that
Monarchiall and Cavaleerish interest, and opposition to
godliness, w=ch= the greatest of the old Forces, and some of the
New, are
<P 189>
affected w=th= and w=ch= some of us looke upon as more dangerous
than any thing the Com~on enemy can do: It is good (\principiis
obstare\) : The Lord direct you in these great Affairs. Some men
may be possessed w=th= high conceits, that Ireland being
conquered is little enough to reward their meritt, that have
served you in that worke, or that you cutt of the heades of
Dukes and Earles to have them placed on their Shoulders, I
presume you will not soe much value upon what I write concerning
these creatures, as to communicate it to any, w=ch= made mee
thus free in my expressions: This is the second tyme since I
came to Ireland, that my wife hath bene soe neare death, as was
past hopes of Recovery, and yet the Lord hath restored her, my
service to yo=r= Lady, M=r= Rowe & his wife & Aldr~an Allein.
   Yo=r= reall & true Servant, as long as my name is
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 16th Sept., 1651.
[^LIST OF LETTERS SENT OMITTED^]

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 190>
[^JOHN JONES TO WILLIAM STANE^]
   To D=r= W=m= Stane,
Deare S=r=
   I have received many sweet Refreshm=ts= from you, the Lord
hath given you plentifully to Drinke of the waters of life, that
you might refresh barren hearts, and comfort drooping and
wounded spirits; shee who held your memory precious, is now upon
finishing her course, and rejoycingly longs to bee dissolved,
and to be w=th= X=t= being full apprehensive of the eternall
love of the Father, and of the glory of the Lord Jesus, that
shalbee revealed unto her, she hath kept her bed this 4
monethes, and hath bene continued w=th= us by an extraordinary
measure of spirit, having for many dayes taken noe sustenance
but small beer, but now the frame of her nature is dissolved,
she desires to be remembred to the Lady Ireton, whom shee doeth
highly hono=r= and the S'=ts= at Westm=r=
   Dear S=r= shall Ireland noe more enjoy you. I am perswaeded
that a new Representative may doe much toward the planting of
Ireland w=th= very good people, what qualificac~ons will
perswade a people sencible of their present burthens, and not of
the reasons, and necessity of them to choose those persons that
laid the burthens, or their adherents to bee of the next
representative? What Interest in England is like to carry the
universall vote? Is not that Interest, that seeing to be in a
suffering condic~on, and to promisse ease of burthens, and new
impositions, if it were againe in power, like to have great
stroke in Elec~con? Who shall jugde wheter Rules, and
qualificac~ons appointed bee observed in Elec~cons? who shalbe
of that Com~itte? and who shall appointe such a one? if the new
Representative according to the freedome and usage of former
Parliam=ts=? will the lesser expell the greater number by vote?
if force interpose, will they not cry out, that their freedome
is invaded? If y=e= hearts of the people bee
<P 191>
generally for the present governm=t= and Governo=r= what need
Armies, and guarrisons to be kept on foot? I had rather doe a
people good though against their wills, than please them in shew
onely, to the hazarding of y=e= peace, and wel being? God gave
men Reason, that they should bee guided by it, in the affairs of
men, where (by an unavoydable necessity), they are not warranted
to expect extraordinary successe by a Devine Providence: let
their be patience, used until burthens may be taken of, and the
people enjoy some Rest, and opulency under y=e= new chaunge, let
the old weeds that lye dead on the ground, have time to Rott,
let the Com~onwealth have some time to take roote in the
interests of men, before it be transplanted or grafted on
another stocke, lett their be some trialls made by Elecc~ons to
vacant places, and by adjoyrnements, and then some Judgm=t= may
be given.
   If you have nothing else to doe answer my queres, &c., and
hide my folly or weakness in propounding these things, but it is
to a friend.
   The Lord is pleased to begin to gather a people here at
Dublin into a Church fellowshipp, the foundac~ons off 2
Congregac~ons are already laid, y=e= number of either not many,
but he that soweth in this vineyard, will give y=e= encrease.
   I long to see what you have to propound for Ireland, I am apt
to Jugde it good before I know it; it groweth late, and I am
much discomposed. The Lord reward yo=r= labour of Love to yo=r=
dying friend, and to your
   faithful friend, and Servant,
Dublin, 19=th= Nov., 1651.
Postscript. 
   Since y=e= writing of the inclosed, I have had leisure to
thinke of another passage in yo=r= letter, w=ch= was concerning
<P 192>
Com=rs= and proposalls sent into Scotland. Verite I like the
Com=rs= exceeding well, and I thinck England hath not another
sett, but I like not their absence from Westm=r= where affaires
of most concernm=t= are.
   The proposalls are hono=ble= and honest, but I am soe short
sighted that I cannot see how it will doe our worke; the men
they shall treate w=th=all are such as get nothing by being
united to England, except loosing their heads when they Rebell:
they have now more immunities, and more power over the people,
then I hope the Law of England will ever admitt.
   It is the interest of the Com~onwealth of England to breake
the Interest of the great men in Scotland, and to settle the
Interest of the com~on people upon a different foote from the
Interests of their Lords and Masters. The late King seing the
interest of the Lords there to bee then (when he attempted to
invade them) against his interests, made a Proclamac~on that
such as were Tennants to those great men that then opposed him
should hold their lands of him, paying but one moiety, as I
remember, of the Rents and Duties they were bound to pay their
Landlords, but they were wise enough to keepe this from the
Tennants, and the issue was not tried.
   What he would have done upon Injurious grounds the Parliam=t=
may doe upon honest and honourable grounds; the invasion in y=e=
yeare 1648, and y=e= charge of the army in seeking Reparac~on
(w=ch= ought to have beene given in an amiable way) amounts to a
higher acc=t= than all Scotl=d= is worth. The great men will
never be faithfull to you, soe long as you propound freedome to
y=e= people and Reliefe ag=t= their Tiranny. The people will
hardly comprend y=e= excellency of a Com: Wea: & a free people
of England, they having noe money to buy lands in England, and
by that freedome loosing y=e= advantage of transporting English
<P 193>
Wool, Leather, and other prohibited com~odities into forrigne
p=ts=; they will not app=r=hend y=t= it is for y=er= good and
for the safty of y=t= countrey, y=t= they should pay great
Taxes, Exc. and Customs, but make y=e= freeholds of their
respective holdings upon reasonable termes, you will presntly
settle a Revenue, and fix their Interest to you.
   Yo=rs= in y=e= Lord Jesus,
   J. J.

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 193>
[^JOHN JONES TO MORGAN LLOYD^]
To M=r= Morgan Lloyd,
   19=th= Nov., 1651.
Deare Brother in the Lord Jesus,
   The Lord Jesus reward you for yo=r= many sweet Refreshments
and Christian consolations administered to yo=r= unworthy
friends here. I believe most of yo=r= L=res= came to us; I must
desire a further time to give a more particular accompt of them.
At present I write w=th= a trembling heart, my dearest
yokefellow being upon the point of finishing her course in this
life, and ready to be gathered to the bosome of the father, to
behold the glory of the Lord Jesus, her head and spouse. Yo=rs=
that came by the last Packett, being 4 in number, much refreshed
her spirit, and raised a conceit in her (upon yo=r= expression
of dedd Lazarus) that shee should Recover, saying shee had faith
enough to be healed, and pressing earnestly (when shee was not
able to turne herselfe in her bedd) to be carried into Wales, to
see the Saints at Wrexham, who had soe many prayers at the Trone
of grace in her behalfe; but now shee perceives that her
Redemption draweth nigh, wherein shee doeth much Rejoyce,
earnestly desiring to be dissolved and to be w=th= X.=t.= Last
night I was called up (having watched with her the night
before), shee being growne speechles, but after a little time
shee Recovered her speech.
<P 194>
I believe shee cannot continue 2 nights longer w=th=out a
speciall worke of God, the frame of her nature being quite
dissolved in her. I rejoyce in the paper you sent from
Merrionythshire: the Lord grant it proceeds from Renewed
Spiritts, and not from carnall compliance. It is not difficult
to make use of a gospell Language; but it is a Rare and a
blessed thing to have soe many gospell spiritts in that
countrey. There may much sincerity accompany a little faith,
little knowledge and great Temptac~ons, w=ch= abound in that
countrey. The more tender a plant is, the more often nourishm=t=
must be applied. I intend (as soon as I can attaine to any
leisure and composednes of spirit) to write to Cousin Robert
Owens, whose heart, I am perswaeded, y=s= Right, although
Discretion and Xtian prudence may be wanting. In a
magistraticall cognizance it is good to be severe, that the
world may know y=t= the power is ordeined for a terror to evill
doers, and y=t= y=e= sword is not boorne in vayne, but in Xtian
cognizance and gospell administrac~ons, the ruling power is
love; whatsoever proceeds not from love, as to y=e= persons of
men, proceeds not from a gospell spiritt. I must entreat you to
excuse mee because I write not to Cap=t= Taylor (and my other
friends): I shall, if y=e= Lord permitt, answer his by y=e=
next. I am not able to write more. Y=e= L=d= Jesus encrease his
guifts and graces in you more and more, and deale unto you
aboundantly out of those rich Tre~rs of wisdome and knowledge
his in him.
   Yo=rs= in the L=d= Jesus,
   J. J.

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 194>
[^JOHN JONES TO THOMAS SCOTT^]
   M=r= Tho. Scott,
Dear and my ever hon=d= Friend,
   The inclosed, from Mr. Frost, is from Mr. Coghlin Com~issary
Gen=ll= Reinolds, certifyes here that Clare Castle
<P 195>
is surrendered to Leif=t= Gen=ll= Ludlow. The Irish are now
endeavouring to have a gen=ll= meeting or councell, as they call
it, at James Towne upon the Shannon northward. Itt is thought
they have some express from their young King, since the defeate
at Worcester, and many of them seemes to bee confident that
their King hath a considerable army in the Marches of Wales, by
whom a considerable overthrowe was given (as they alleadge) to
the Parliam=ts= forces in South Wales - this Reported by Dungan
to Coll. Markham, who is his prisoner, and now upon his paroll,
he hath desired leave to send into England to understand the
condic~on of affaires there, being resolved (as he sayeth) to
lay downe Armes, and get beyond Seas, as soone as he is
satisfyed the King's Interest is lost in England, but the
Com=er= will not (without further advice) grant such leave,
least such might be sent to negociate with forrigne agents.
Lorraine is still high in their hopes and expectations, w=th=
w=ch= they abuse the common people, and endeavo=r= to draw them
to a generall rising, perswaeding them that the Parliam=t= will
grant them noe termes for Religion, Lives, or Estates. Longford
and severall other Baronies are lately gone out in Rebellion,
but the Lord hath cast feares and terrors upon them; when they
intend to Rest, apprehensions of feares and allarmes fall upon
them, even when noe parties of o=rs= are neere; they are divided
into factions and jalousies among themselves; the old Irish
looke upon Dungan and Sherlocke and their Adherents, as falling
away from them, and all confesse themselves to bee in a
desperate and lost condic~on. If the Parliam=t= thinke fitt to
hold forth any qualificac~ons to them, I humbly conceive it is
high time they were declared. Sir, I beseech you, afford a
little of yo=r= assistance to y=e= affaires of Ireland, at that
com~ittee, especially in those particulars of money menc~oned in
o=r= letters to y=e= councell, wherein the condicon of affaires
here
<P 196>
are faithfully Represented. Trully I write these lines to you
w=th= a trembling heart; my dear wife, a precious godly woeman,
and a faithfull yokefellow, is now finishing her course, after 4
monethes heavy sicknes - shee cannot, without a miracle, outlive
this night. In respect of her I have great cause to rejoyce, but
I want a selfe-denying spirit. This will occasion, and hath
drawne uppon me already, some extraordinary charge, w=ch= makes
me presume to desire yo=r= favour to know whether anything hath
bene thought of upon the Com=rs= letters to yo=r= selfe, S=r=
Henry Vane and Major Galloway concerning o=r= Sallaries. I
thought to have bene silent in this matter, but necessity of
conveniency at least makes mee breake through any former
Resoluc~ons, rather than hazard an Imputac~on of a base Mind: If
anything bee ordered in that particular, I desire my brother
Humphrey Jones (who professes much beholdingnes to you) might
have an order to Receive to my use what is allotted to mee. Here
is noe money to be had, and it were a sinne to take it if it
were, while soe many poore sick souldiers are dayly perishing
for want of competent sustennance. Pardon this my freenes w=th=
you, being soe unworthy of soe many favours and respects as you
have bene pleased to cast upon mee. Yo=rs= of the 4=th= of
November came very seasonably to us with the newes of Man and
Jersey, wee having then a convoy goeing to Connaught. If it were
not presumption, I could wish that my humble services were
presented to my Lord Leif=t= who sent me hither, the unworthiest
and unfittest of many thousands. I wish the Lord would furnish
me w=th= such a head and heart to mannage this great Trust as he
hath who designed me for it. I shall noe further adde to yo=r=
trouble at present.
   Yo=r= faithfull and true Servant.
Dublin, 19=th= Nov., 1651.

<Q JON 1651 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 197>
[^JOHN JONES TO THOMAS SCOTT^]
   To Mr Scott
Hon=ed= S=r=
   There hath not any opportunity of sending over from [\SIC\]
beene offered me, wherin I have not troubled you w=th= some few
lines; Two of w=ch= you menc~on (in yo=rs= of y=e= 11=th= of
November) to have rec=d= together; but I beginne to be a little
suspitious, whether I keepe within the compasse of good manners,
considering how little I can contribute to the satisfaction of
wise men, and yet by that litle how much I interrupte yo=r= more
weighty affairs, in yo=r= retaliation, truly S=r= I rejoyce in
yo=r= l='res= but when I consider how little time you have to
spare I am sorry I am an occasion of yo=r= trouble.
   I hope by this time y=e= sadde newes of that blessed S=t=
Ireton is in some measure digested by all his Relations, and
that some Resolution is already taken for y=e= suplying of his
absence in yo=rr= service heer, although I can never hope to be
acquainted with soe humble, patien=t= wise, religious
selfedenying man, as he was; It wilbee necessary to have the
pleasure of the Parliam=t= and Councell knowne heere in that
matter w=th= all speede. It wilbee a means to settle some
humo=r= w=ch= may beginne to stirr and swell with hopes, and
expectac~ons, and to prevent y=e= breaking out of those
animosities, w=ch= (by the wisdom of him that is gone) were
silenced! but if that be delayed, ambition, crosse Interests,
and diversity of Judmen=ts=, will have time to take Roote, and
cast therein Influences upon publiq=c= affaires, and you may be
assured that such tempers there are in the Army; But y=e= Lord
Leif=ts= presence (if y=e= most sadd newes of y=e= Lord Deputies
death hath not too much indisposed him and the affaires in
England, can admitt his absence from the house and Councell)
will remove all difficulties, and give new life to those that
desire to promote religious and publiq=e= Interests; I am very
sensible of the condic~on
<P 198>
under w=ch= you are in respect of yo=r= dearest consort, myself
having bene long exercised under y=e= like afflc~con w=ch= the
Lord in much mercy to her (hath now given a period to), by
taking her to himselfe, a more religious, discreet, and lovely
creature, I believe never dwelt in this unhappy Land. The Lord
teaches to find y=e= cause of o=r= rejoycings to be above
creature comforts.
[^A PASSAGE PROBABLY OMITTED^]
   It is very unusual, especially amongst statesmen, to extend
soe much fav=r= and Respect when there is no expectac~on of
suitable returns. I am sorry you are put to soe much trouble, as
to move the Howse in o=r= businesse, and for my own parte, I had
rather suffer much hardship, than to have o=r= names come there
upon such selfish occas~on; and yet this may pc~eed from pride
of heart in mee, who have greater Reason than the rest to bee
sollicitous therein. My dearest wife's interm=t= and sickness
having cost me neer +L500, for w=ch= I stand ingaged to Honest
Aldr~an Hutchinson, who letts noe man that is a friend to the
Parliame=t= nor y=e= publiq=e= affaires want anything, that he
can help them to. Wee are now goeing to Kilkenny, and from
thence to Connaught, to endeavo=r= the setling of the affaires
of the army, untill the Parliam=t= shall order the conduct of
the Forces, and managem=t= of those in some better hands; wee
expect to meete many difficulties when the officers are come
together out of the severall quarters, because the contribuc~ons
fall exceeding shorte in most places, very many Baronies, and
some whole Counties, w=ch= paid considerable assessm=ts= the
last yeare, and y=e= begining of this summer, are now totally
wasted, soe that all the Revenue that can be raised here, and
the Treasury that comes from England (except it be in larger
proporc~on than ordinary), cannot possibly pay the Forces,
according to the reduced establishm=t= here, w=ch= is 4 days pay
to officers, 6s. per weeke
<P 199>
and forrage to troopers, and 3s. 3d. per weeke to private foote
souldiers, below w=ch= I thinke it is impossible for them to
live; and yet there must be gott at least 12,000lbs. worth of
corne into the stores for y=e= next spring, some speciall
significac~on of y=e= Parliam=ts= care and tenderness of y=e=
Forces in Ireland, would be very seasonable at this time. I doo
very well like the course you propound to supply a charracter. I
shall hereafter take care that yo=r= l=res= you shall please to
send me be well ayred, and where you find this marke x in mine
you may give it a warm enterteynment.
[^A PASSAGE PROBABLY OMITTED^]
   I cannot tell if any further service in that or any other
maner may be avayleable unto you, I shall rejoyce in receiving
yo=r= further pleasure, and my endeavo=r= shall bear witness how
desirous I am to be found,
   Yo=r= faithfull and usefull and humble servant.
Dublin, 25=o= Dec=r= 1651.

<Q JON 1652 THARRISON>
<A THOMAS HARRISON>
<G M>
<P 199>
[^THOMAS HARRISON TO JOHN JONES^]
Major Gen=ll= Harrison to Col=l= Jones.
   8=th= daie 1=st= m. 52.
Much endeared Brother,
   I have beene prevented three or foure poasts in writing my
kind acknowledgmen=t= to you of yo=r= last loving and very
Spiritual letter; I am soe assured of yo=r= endeared respects
and readiness to cover my failings, that I shall omit to saie
anie thing forr my excuse, onely that I thinke I have beene more
troubled att the delaie then you. Notwithstanding some (ignorant
of you) have enquired after your steadfastness,
<P 200>
because M=r= Erberry vouched you in a booke wee lately putt
forth, yett I thanke the Lord I had not an undervaluing thought,
but was able to plead yo=r= innocence. As for the poore requests
I have formerly made to yow, where of yo=r= last mentions, I
kindly thancke yo=r= remembrance of them, though as yett the
Lord hath not cleared yo=r= waie to answere them, in his time I
hope for both. Our last letters give us to believe, That not
onely the Dutch but France, Denmarke, and Spaine will engage
speedily against us: doe not theise things import the Lord of
Hoasts about his Threshing-worke. Yett we are labouring after a
peace w=th= the Dutch, notwithstanding a crosse-providence.
Whether is most the Saints worke, to run after Christ to Sea
whereon hee hath begun to sett his right foote, or to men
fearing the Lord to bee putt into all places of power att home.
I earnestly beseech you in yo=r= addresses to the Allmightie and
o=r= owen Father Remember yo=r= Fellow Member. 
   T. H.

<Q JON 1652 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 200>
[^JOHN JONES TO HENRY CROMWELL^]
   To Col=l= Cromwell,
Honored Sir,
   I hope the Lord hath brought you safe to yo=r= relations, and
that he hath given you a heart never to forgett the loveing
kindnes of the Lord, nor to be lifted up in your speritt in the
enjoym=t= of mercyes as though your owne hand had acquired them
for you: A meeke and an humble sperett is a Pretious frame,
which the Lord will owne in that day when he maketh up his
Jewells, 3 Mal: 17.
   Truly S=r= I have had many thoughts of that sinne of
forgetting the Lord and what he had done for us; how
<P 201>
dangerous it is produceing naturally the sinnes of Ingratitude
and Pride, which the Lord fearfully punisheth. The Prosperous
state is the slippery and dangerous state of a Christian,
because then the Poore Creature is apt to have his affextions
fixed upon outward enjoym=ts= and to waxe fatt, lightly
esteeming of the Roott of his Salvations, and forgetting God
that formed him. Deut. 32. In such a condic~on it is good to be
often looking Back from what state and into what state we are
brought, before how many thousands are wee advanced by free
grace, and not by any thing in ourselfes. That the higher we are
advanced in the world, the more dangerous is the Pinacle wee
stand upon, and this should teach us not to be high minded butt
feare. If I had observed in you a high and selfish speritt I am
affrayd my base heart had not beene free to use this freedome
with you, my desier is to mynd you of this Rock whereon many
have made shipwracke of good conscience that thorow grace you
may avoyd them. I shall humbly desier you to read over these
ensueing Scriptures, and I hope wilbe of use to you, to healpe
and quicken your sperit to the Dutyes before mentioned. Deu. 4.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Deut. 6. 3 to y=e= 14=v= (Cor. 2. 2, 4;
from y=e= 15=th= to y=e= 23. These two last demonstrate the
haynousness of the sinne of ingratitude Towards God.) Isay
17=th= 10, 11. I doe not know any one History soe often cyted in
Scripture, as that in the 25=th= of Numbers and in most of them
mentioned as a sinne of fforgettfulnes. I hope the Lord hath
endued you with a gratious temper of sperit to beare with the
weakenesses of men and to accept of a cupp of cold water
tendered in Love.
   This instant while I was a writeing this letter came a letter
to me intimating that there is an intention of putting another
Cap=t= to com~and my Troope; so farr as myne owne interest is
concerned therein I doe most freely submitt into
<P 202>
it but with all I doe most ernestly desier, that it may be soe
disposed of that those few p'sons in that country who have sett
their hearts to seeke the Lord (and have bene hitherto
counttenanced, and encouradged therein by that troope, more then
by any other power or p'sons in civill authority in that country
may be protected by them, and that the officers of the troope
may receive y=e= benefitt of the remove, they being religious,
faithfull, and stout, not inferior to any of their degree, I am
p~swaded. And therefore I conceve it a sinn to putt any
unnecessary discouragem=t= upon them, for my owne pt~e. If I
conceived that by this removeall, I should want any parte of
that intimacy, and freedome, I have had with those precious
godly p'sons of the troope, it would much trouble me. But in
other respects (I hope that consideration wil be had of them.) I
submitt and therefore make bold humbly to begg yo=r= favo=r= to
represent my sence in this matter to such as are to act more
properly in affaires of that nature and especially to my
honorred and deare friend Major Gen=ll= Harrison unto whom I
cannot possibly write at present, the packett being just now
going away, w=ch= I hope he will take in good pte, considering
he hath knowne me soe long, that my age may plead something for
my penn, But as yet he hath not a right to that plea for not
remembering an old acquaintance in above two yeares time,
however, I confesse the duty runnes retrograde in these outward
expressions of Respects, and I have been fayling in mind towards
him: I am confident he hath made good his promisse of often
minding me and the rest that came to Ireland at the throne of
grace, and y=t= y=e= efficacy of such prayors and wrestlings
hath hithertoe preserved us. The Lord guide you by his spiritt
to lay out yourselfe for him according to the opportunity he
putts into your hands) in a spiritt of meekness, humility, and
sobriety,
<P 203>
and teach you to enquire every stepp you goe, whether this be
the way of the Lord and whether you are ledd by his councell to
what you undertake.
   Your very faithfull and reall Servant,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 22=nd= January, 1852.
I have sent enclosed the Articles of Arran.

<Q JON 1652 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 203>
[^JOHN JONES TO THOMAS(?) SCOTT^]
   To Ma=r= Scott,
Hon=ed= Sir.
   The Lord is pleased (by varyous providences) to afford some
matter of late to communicate unto you, to teach us our strength
is in him who guids the affaires and councells of men, according
to his Eternal purpose and will, and that wee have noe strength
or wisdom of our owne whereon wee may relye.
   I shall first mention those p'ticulars wherein God is pleased
to owne his weake instruments, as the delivering of Inis Buffin,
and the rest of the adjacent Islands, into the Parlia=nt=
possession; the articles of surrender are sent to the Parliam=t=
and counsell, and may be thought suteable to the difficulty of
gaining of that place by fforce.
   Questionless that service was owned by God, for during all
the time of that Treaty, there was soe greate a calme that our
shipps Ridd in safety close to the Island all the while, which
they could not possibly have done if any winde had beene
stirring, as Cap=t= Clarke informs us; secondly, the delivering
of several Islands in the Loughs in Ulster to our fforces, in
one of which Sir Phelim O'Neale was taken, and was Isterday
tryed at our high court of Justice at
<P 204>
Dublin, and condemned of High Treason, and within a few hours a
period will be given to his high titles as being created Earle
of Tyrone, by the Ultaghes, according to their Rude solemnityes,
Prince of Ulster by the Pope's Commission or Bull, Gen=ll= of
all the Leinster and Ulster fforces, by comission from the lords
of y=e= Pale, and the Prince and Cheefe actor in the Horrid
Massacres and Rebellion, by comission from the late Charles
Stuart, as himselfe hath often confessed, and published in his
manifest=as=; all which was made good by evidence at his tryall.
This course of inquisition after Blood, and doeing exemplary
justice, is terrible to this nation; insoemuch that the
murtherers hearts faint, and theire joynts tremble even to
admiration, when they come to y=e= Barr. This cruell monster of
men when he came first to the Barr was scarce able to stand for
trembling, or to speak for teares. I beleefe tho some of their
guilte of murthers have driven many out of late, insoemuch that
the rebbles are lately growne numerous, and have beene
instruments to give us some sharpe rebukes about the 6th of
ffebruary, neare Rannile Castle, in Erconaught, almost over
ag=t= Inis Buffin; 800 Irish fell (out of an ambush in a narrow
pass) upon 270 foote, which were marching that way to meete the
fforces that went by sea to reduce Buffin, and routed them, in
this ingagem=t= Cap=t= Hassett, who commanded the party, and
Cap=t= Weston, L=t= Lewis and L=t= Hall, and about 46 private
souldiours were slayne; yet the remainder of the party rallyed,
and routed the enemye, and y=e= enemy rallyed, and our party
routed them the second tyme; butt being foote and strangers they
could not p'sue to considerable effect. A Cap=t= of y=e= enemy
and some more men were slayne, and our own armes, and the
enemyes armes upon the last rout were recovered by oure men, and
the next day they tooke L=t= Gen=ll= Burke in y=e= Island, which
I hope will be delivered
<P 205>
up to justice. The Lord Muskerry is lately landed at Corke, and
sayes he will cast himselfe upon the Parliam=ts= mercy,
pretending that Clergie in Spaine had determined to murther him,
and that Portugal would not entertayne him, of all which I
beleeve, but my share, he is sent for to Dublin in (\Salvia
Custodia\) .
   In Kerry, and Corke, and those parts very many are gone out
lately, Co=ll= O'Sillinan Beere, and Co=ll= O'Driskall, and
divers others who formerly came in on Muskerry's articles are
gone out, and reported to be 1500 men strong. They have taken
[^EMPTY SPACE IN THE EDITION^] Islands, in the Bay of Bantry (as
I take it), for recovery of which place fforces are ordered both
by sea and land; those Muskerry Rebbles fell upon one Cap=t=
Gibbons and 40 musketteres w=th= him, killed the said Cap=t,=
L=t= Boone, Ensign Booth, and 34 private men, 6 only escapeing.
The enemy then lost a Cap=t,= a L=t,= and 6 men, and 27 wounded;
this success made the enemy to attempt to surprise a convoy of
about 90 foote, which was goeing from Dingle to fforce Needham,
commanded by L=t= Lambart, w=th= provision for that Garr=isn=
who being come within two myles of y=e= fort, y=e= enemy appeerd
unto him, conceaved to be in number 800, and thereupon the whole
party left the carriadges, threw down theere armes and ranne to
Co=ll= Macffinnens howse being not farr off, except the L=t= and
sixe men, who it seemes stood and were slayne; the enemy pursued
them to Macffinnins house to putt them all to the sword, but
Mcffinnin being not soe unhospitable or barbarous as his
neighbours would have him to bee, protested that himselfe and
every man with him would dye in their own defense, unless they
would accept of a Ransome for the men, which being (w=th=
seeming difficulty) accepted, Mcffinnin payd the money presently
and sent the men home. I have been the more p'ticular in these
two, because in them the Lord seems to rebuke us, and yet he
does not leave us
<P 206>
without daily testimony of his love and tenderness towards us. A
party from Limerick fell lately upon those y=t= are out in y=t=
county, and killed about 60 of them; the like number were killed
by Corke fforces lately, and at another tyme about 40; and this
day we have intelligence from Co=ll= Barrow that Trinity Island,
in the county of Cavan (as I take it), and some other Island
thereabouts, are delivered up unto him, and that he is now
before Cloughwater Castle, and hath by a fiery floate burnt
theire Boates or Cotts (as be hopes), and with sluges hath burnt
theire corne, and hopes in a short tyme it will be rendered or
quitted. This is theire most confideing garrison in Ulster. God
hath Brought them very low, both in spirit and number in the
north. There is noe way to reduce this land to a p'fect and
lasting peace, but by removing all heads of Septs and Preists
and men of knowledge in armes, or otherwise in repute, out of
this land, and breaking all kinds of interest among them, and by
laying waste all fast countreyes in Ireland, and suffer noe
mankind to live there, but within garrisons, for which end
Declarations are going out to lay wast the whole County of
Kerry, and a great part of the countyes of Corke, Lymerick,
Typerary, Clare, Galloway, Roscomon, Sligo, &c., the whole
countyes of Letrime, ffermanagh, Cavan, Tyrone, Monaghan, and
Ardmanagh, except peeres of Barrownyes in some of them, not
considerable. Likewise part of Longford, Meath, and Lowth,
bordering upon those countyes; the whole county of Wicklow, and
part of King and Queen's Countyes. I am afrayd I have too much
presumed upon yo=r= patience in soe tedious a narration, butt
yo=r= goodness will beare with more faults then this in
   Yo=r= reall and humble servant
   J. J.
Dublin, 1=st= May, 1652.

<Q JON 1652 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 207>
[^JOHN JONES TO THOMAS HARRISON^]
   To Major Gen=ll= Harrison.
Deare S=r= 
   Nott long after the Lord Deputyes departure from us there was
a strong apprehention uppon y=e= speritt of one Eminent Coll. in
y=e= army (who I hope is now at rest), y=t= most of the
principall officers and command=rs= of the forces in Ireland
were designers of some dangerous interest, and that they would
promote y=e= same by theire power and commands in the army,
which being made knowne to the Com=rs= of Parliam=t= they have
seriously inquired into, and examined the grounds, of such an
apprehention, and found it to have neither Evidence to warrant
it, nor any probability of reason to support it. Butt the
contrary was very evident, and cleere to the Judgmen=t= of most,
if not all y=e= Com=rs= viz=t= that the Persons conceived to be
those designers, are the most godly, most praying, and most
self-denying men, that ever served any state in theire capacity,
whereof they have not only before, butt alsoe since that time
given most ample and pregnant testimony, and nevertheless it is
reported here, y=t= those apprehentions of them have been
transmitted into England, and there represented as truths to
theire prejudice, I am persuaded y=t= theire frequent and ernest
prayers to, and wrestlings with the Lord for his appearance, in,
and with the Parliam=t= in the manadgm=t= of the great duty and
trust y=t= lyeth upon them in the settlem=t= of the peace and
tranquility, of the nations committed to theire care, and in
y=e= advancem=t= of the Gospell, in y=e= Power and purity
thereof hath pv~ayled much on theire behalfe, and I hope y=t=
y=e= Lord will never suffer the Parliam=t= (whom he hath soe
highly honored), in his work, even to y=e= terror and admirac~on
of all y=e= Nations round about you) to weaken y=e= hand or
sadden the hearts of such pretious Saints, and faithful servants
to theire interest, the temper of whose Speritts, in y=e=
manadgm=t= of affaires here may be gathered
<P 208>
by the inclosed w=ch= I have sent you for that end, and have
ps~umed (upon that old acquaintance I have had with you, and
those warm expressions of your love to myself (the unworthyest
of all your acquaintance), as to all those that have any
appearance of the Image of Christ, and worke of grace upon
theire heartes) to trouble you with these hasty lines, that (if
you see cause) you may make use of them, for y=e= vindicacon of
the servants of Christ, in Ireland, (concerned in this nation)
soe farr as you shall conceave fitting, wee are here in a
longing expectac~on of some persons armed with authority to
Exersize the power formerly placed in the Deputy Generall to be
sent over to ease those that are unskillfull in Imploym=t= of
such importance, and doe really and cordially desier to be eased
therein. I can truly and freely say that although I account it
the greatest earthly favor attaynable by me to be thought worthy
by the Parliam=t= to be Imployed in theire service (wherein I
hope through grace to be found faithful), yett I cannot take
much comfort in any Imploym=t= for which I am not fittly
Qualified; and I believe the rest of my fellow Com=rs= are of
the same minde, I beseech y=e= Lord Jehova to guide you in your
walkings before him to manifest unto you more and more of his
Eternall love, and free grace in Christ, to fill your heart with
a Speritt of Humility, and the feare of his greate name, and to
purg you of all rising thoughts or desier of greate things in
the world, w=ch= I finde to be close and dangerous snares,
attending high Imploym=ts.= I shall add noe further to your
trouble at present, butt to assure you both with heart and hand
that I am, &c.,
   Jo. Jones.
Cork, June 21st, 1652.

<Q JON 1652 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 209>
[^JOHN JONES TO MORGAN LLOYD^]
   To M=r= Morgan Lloyd.
Most Deare and beloved in y=e= Lord,
   Yours of y=e= 21=st= of y=e= 5=th= came to my hand this day,
I have not time to make knowne our wants unto you in this poore
Ireland, the Irish bloody party in all places subdued, except a
few in the North who keepe in woods, boggs, and mountaynes,
inaccessable with an army, w=ch= will require time to subdue
them by planting Garrisons upon them to starve them, and yet God
is pleased to hould forth some tokens of his displeasure, the
sickness rages in Galloway and is spread over all that province.
It fearfully brake out at Cashell, a few days since the people
being taken suddenly with madness, whereof they dye instantly,
20 dyed in that manner in three days in that little towne. The
sickness is in Dublin and countrey about, but not soe violent as
in other places, but few escape that have it, Mr. Richardson,
our auditor, sometimes a member of Allhallowes Ch. came home
with us on Munday night, and the next day his wife, his maid,
and two of his children were visited, Poore Colonell Barrow
continues still in y=e= hands of cruell bloody men, who will not
release him under 2000 (^l^) ransome, or pardon to them for
their murders, I desire in y=e= behalfe of y=e= servants of God
here that our ffellow members with you doe earnestly seeke the
Lord on our behalfes, that his mind may be revealed unto us in
these his reproofs, and that the Lord may deliver such of his
servants as are now cast unto y=e= furnace of aflic~con. It is
good at all times, (but especially when the Lord appeares
terrible to y=e= children of men by his judgm=ts=) to be
striving and wrestling with the Lord for a spirit of prayer, of
humility, of love, and of y=e= feare of y=e= Lord w=ch=
proceedeth from love. It is good then to be dwelling with him in
the coole under the mulberry trees, in and under his ordinance,
not in speculations, or unwarrantable empty
<P 210>
notions, soaring soe high, that the wings of holy zeale are -,
Gospell ordinances and administrac~ons, accounted contemptible,
and carnall, and esteemed yokes, not priviledges, from whence
must follow a fearfull and a hideous falling downe into the sea
of perdition, these things I menc~on, because some such wee have
in Ireland, Lt. Col. Bowen is gone soe farr in that way, that he
is become a professed Atheist, and is shortly to come to his
trial for y=e= same, there be some others of that way towards
Corke, the Lord helpe us to watch over our spiritts, and to
disserne this spirit of Delusion, this Dragons Tayle, that
strikes soe many professors out of y=e= Church, whose fall
shakes, and darkens heaven, makes poore weake saints stagger, I
have not time to enlarge, nor to write to my boy, nor other
friends at present, I desire you to remember me to them. The
Lord give you much comfort of your little one,
   Your assured friend in Christ,
   Jo. Jones.
   I am not sorry for y=e= Welch Petic~on, the more the Saints
are tryed, the more their luster will appeare, it is good to
observe what hands promote it, who they be that subscribe it,
and to take exact notice what temper they are of, and what kind
of ministry they are and would promote.

<Q JON 1652 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 210>
[^JOHN JONES TO MAJOR SALWEY^]
To Maio=r= Sallway.
   I have aduentured once more to convey unto you a cast of
Hawkes by the Bearer (being a ffalken and a Tassell), if they
come not to y=r= hands in good condic~on, I desire he may not
Receave any incouradgm=t= by yo=r= bounty towards him. As to the
hopefullness of theire being as serviceable as usually creatures
of theire kind are. I must wholely depend
<P 211>
upon my good friend y=t= helpes mee toe them, not haveing any
judgment to decerne the goodness of them: The Lord keepe your
Speritt constantly upon the wing y=t= the marrow and substance
of your delight may be above any Earthly creatures or comforts,
and that those greate Endowments which God hath qualifyed you
with to decerne of things beyond the ordinary Pitch of men, may
not be like your high flown Hawkes, who although they be carryed
up farr above the Earth, yet they have theire backes towards
heaven, and theire Eyes are fixed upon the Earth.
   Your most affectionat frind and very reall servant,
   J. Jones.
Drogedah August 19th 1652.

<Q JON 1652 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 211>
[^JOHN JONES TO MORGAN LLOYD^]
   To M=r= Morgan Lloyd.
Most deare and beloved in Christ,
   It is a most blessed thing to have a close com~union with our
God, in the motions and workings of that love which the eternall
Speritt of love and life begetts in the heart, those are the
Rivers of living waters, which flow from the humble and meek
speritts of a Saint to refresh barren and dry hearts and to
quicken dead, dull, and slow speritts. These flowings from your
heart to your penn hath through grace conveyed much Refresm=t=
and comfort to your friends here in Ireland that dwell in the
midst of snares, and being called to spend theire whole tyme in
earthly and carnall Imploym=ts=, have theire Speritts much
deadened, and cooled in the things of Heaven, and affaires of
the Soull. If a stone or piece of Earth were placed in the
braine and at the heart, how could and heavy would the Speritt
be, even such are the affaires of the world (although honest
<P 212>
and necessary.) And therefore happy are they that are least
incumbred with them; my brother Harry being now more than
formerly Engaged in those affaires (having the Governem=t= of
Dublin cast uppon him in Co=ll= Hewsons absence), is more then
ordinarily sensible of this, although God hath given him a
strong lively Speritt in the wayes and workes of Christ. The
Lord is pleased to continue the Rodd of his anger upon this Land
some off his owne people in Dublin are in the furnace, and some
taken away. I pray you sett our X~ian frends with you upon
seeking the Lord Earnestly and frequently for us, and Likewise
for themselfes and all the saints of God least his anger burn
against our couldnes and inactivity. Great actions are abroad,
wherein the hono=d= of God are greatly concerned, who knoweth
whether the faith, prayers and graces of the Saints are given
for such a tyme as this butt if they stand not in y=e= gapp they
will not be approved when deliverance cometh. Your Generalls
torment me by putting me into a longing to know particulars,
what are the things that are printed against the Saints at
Wrexham, unto whom (I hope) the Lord hath given a Speritt of
Sobriety, as well as X~ian zeale not to affect empty vaine
speculations which hath deceaved many into a contempt of the
Ordinances of Christ, and his written word, and at length (like
him that beleved himselfe to be that great Starr which he looked
upon and pointed at) beleeve that themselfes are God and Christ,
that noe Act of theires is sinfull, that Cheques of Conscience
against the Committall of any Act be it ever soe sinfull or
monstrous, proceeds from the want of that Perfection which they
have acquired, and professedly Act in as the enjoym=t= of that
liberty, and Priveledg which the Perfection entitles them unto.
Truly many of those we have heard off, and some of them we met
with in Ireland, and I believe that the knowledg and report of
<P 213>
these things have bredd Jelouses in many well meaning people
that what to them seemes new (although an Evangelical truth)
proceeds from a Speritt of a Delusion, the Lord keepe us close
in the sure word of truth in our walkeings that the ordinances
of Christ which are as soe many Spirituall Buoys, to Direct us
in the right Channell, may not be esteemed nugatory and of noe
force nor advance above theire due Latitude, as the Papists doe
I would have binne glade to have seene what is in printe
questionless it may be guessed from what Speritt, and from what
hand it proceeded, lett Patience worke and you shall see that
shame will be the reward of the Authors and promoters of these
lyes. The Lord reward your great love and kindness to my boy and
give strength to (my deare friend) your wife: I thanke you for
your freedome with mee as to Marriage, I desire to know from
whom and of whom the report you mention came, and for your
satisfac~con I doe really profess unto you that since the
departure of my deare wife (of most pretious memory) I have not
seene nor do I know, nor can thinke of that woeman on whom I
have Pitched my thoughts to be in that Relation to mee, and if
all the world were sett before mee to make my choice off, my
thoughts doo not yett lead mee to any one numerically, my minde
as yett suites not with the ofspring of this climate. If I were
in my native country, and could meete with one endued with soe
much grace, meekness, humility, love, comelines, and wisdome as
she had who is removed from mee, and one that in the course of
nature might promisse children, and would love my boy as her
owne, and be content he should be the Elder Brother, I should
blesse God for such an acquaintance. I wish M=r= Powell would
leave his disputeing and that he and you would come over for
Ireland for some time. Many Gratious hearts and heades here
conceave that disputes produce neither grace nor
<P 214>
knowledg but administers and ingenders striffes: pray remember
my deare love to M=r= Powell and M=r= Mostin when you write, and
to all our friends.
   Your very affectionate frind in the Dearest obligat~on,
   Jo. Jones.
Drogedah August 23rd 1652.

<Q JON 1652 THARRISON>
<A THOMAS HARRISON>
<G M>
<P 214>
[^THOMAS HARRISON TO JOHN JONES^]
   Major Gen=l= Thomas Harrison to Col=l= John Jones.
Deare Brother,
   I thank yow for yo=r= last, so full of sweetnes & light,
though complayning of ignorance. I shall now trouble you w=th=
little, save the desire of Manie Bretheren, (sent as messengers
from divers Churches) whereof I have formerly made mention, that
yo=r=selfe would come to Towne with all convenient speed, and
(if itt may bee) by the appointm=t= of yo=r= Congregation, and
one or Two w=th= you, to consult w=th= the Bretheren here of the
propagating of o=r= Lord's Gospell and Kingdome, and love
amongst all Saints, because some here laie weight upon yo=r=
sending. Though here bee a very greete ebb to carnall sense,
yett Manie pretious Ones think itts a time of much Mercie; and
that o=r= blessed Lord will shortly worke w=th= eminence. I have
much very much to acquaint you with, but purposely forbeare in
expectation to enjoy you the next week. Thowe methinks, we have
scarce lived a time more requiring concurrence of the Lord's
people, nor yeelding greater encoragement to laie heads and
heartes and more tthan all together for him that hath so sweetly
loved and dearly bought us; wherefore I beseech you laie this to
heart, hasten to us in the feare of the Lord, and thinke there
maie bee Somewhat extraordinary, that you, Powell, Jenkin,
Jones, and Craddock, w=th=
<P 215>
some Bretheren w=th= you (however yo=r=selfs y=e= messengers
from the Churches) are soe [^EMPTY SPACE IN THE EDITION^] this
juncturre.
The Lord guide you herein and all things.
   Yo=rs= yo=rs= T. H.
Whitehall, 7=th= of the 9=th= m. 52.

<Q JON 1652 THARRISON>
<A THOMAS HARRISON>
<G M>
<P 215>
[^THOMAS HARRISON TO JOHN JONES^]
   9=th= Daie 9=th= m. 1652.
   Major Gen=l= Thomas Harrison to Col=l= John Jones.
Pretious Brother.
   Yo=rs= of very much price came wellcomely to my hands the
last weeke, for w=ch= I retorne you very manie thanks. I have
little more presently to saie to you, because I am att a
Com=ttee= where I want opportunitie. Mr. Frake told mee last
night, that nexte weeke he will give yo=rs= a retorne, and then
Ile speake a little larger if the Lords will. Richard Creed
having now compaired my bookes and receipts, also an accompt
from the Gouvernor of Carlisle, I understand I am yo=r= debtor
(though 10000 times more then heele expresse to you) for yo=r=
troope, w=ch= I will thither transmitt to yo=r= selfe, or paie
here if youle but hint to him. (^Let me have a word from you
upon receipt hereof^) , and how it faires w=th= you and yo=r=
familie because one hinted yo=r= selfe or some of yo=rs= were
not very well.
   I am,
   Yo=r= much endeared Brother and servant in o=r= Lord,
   T. H.

<Q JON 1652 THARRISON>
<A THOMAS HARRISON>
<G M>
<P 217>
[^THOMAS HARRISON TO JOHN JONES^]
Major Gen=l= Harrison to Col=l= Jones.
   27=th= d. 9=th= m. 52.
Deare Sir,
   I praie yo=r= pardon for my last, which was in much love, and
soe exceeding hast (att a Com=ttee= of Parliament where good Mr.
Brooke was desired to be outed because he would not baptize,
bury dead, and accept wicked persons to breake bread) that I
could scarce tell w=t= I wrote, and had not time to conclude
itt.
   I have now inclosed Mr. Frakes to you, w=ch= should have come
sooner, but hee told mee hee had beene disappointed. I hope the
Lord will make yo=r= communion and intercourse usefull, and that
prove I shall have cause to blesse him, in being a hand betweene
you. I entreated his unsealed, for the favo=r= and helpe of
perusing.
   Wee are in daily expectation of engagement with the Dutch,
Blake yesterday certefying us that some of his men had
discovered 80=tie= saile a making upp towards him. That in the
evening from a steeple w=ch= hath advantage for itt, was
desirned 300 [{vessels.{] They are merchantmen in generall, and
the rest are theire convoy, but hope the Lord will cause them to
enforce us, or ours enforce them to fight. Manie of the Lord's
deare servants long for engagem=t= care not for the inequalitie
to [{numbers{] knowing the cause engaged, and who is for us. A
sweet spiritt of praier begins to issue forth, and some hope
will never againe decline. If you are not free to see London
this winter without a very speciall call, where I thinke you
might bee very serviceable, yet put yo=r=selfe into some
readiness for itt. Itts probable yo=r= troope maie bee called
hither to doe dutie for 3 or 4 monethes, and then I hope you
maie see an opportunitie of coming with them. My endeared
respects to all yo=rs= and Christ's,
   Whose I desire to remain approvedly,
   T. H.

<Q JON 1652 THARRISON>
<A THOMAS HARRISON>
<G M>
<P 218>
[^THOMAS HARRISON TO JOHN JONES^]
Major Gen=l= Harrison to Col=l= Jones.
Deare bro.
   According to w=t= I hinted (as I remember) in my last, after
wee had spent yesterday 4 or 5 howers in prayer (wherein indeed
we found a sweet p=r=sence of y=e= Lord) y=e= Elders came
together, having many of them (as I have good reason to judge)
their harts full of propositions according to God, wherein the
Churches might be serviceable to the fullest propagation of y=e=
Gospell, but y=e= consideration thereof was putt off till one
day more might be spent in solume seeking unto God for the
pouringe forthe of his Spirit, whereby wee may certainely know
o=r= duty and bee fully enabled to it. And by com~on consent the
5=th= day of y=e= next weeke, at Alhallowes, y=e= Churches of
S'=ts= are to attend upon y=e= Lord of y=e= Harvest in this
great thing, and truly I hope wee shall come as one man w=th=
hearts engaged to approach unto him. And this I write not onely
y=t= you may have fare understanding of o=r= affairs, but
chiefly that you may gett together on y=e= same day the people
of God in yo=r= quarters to joine w=th= us in putting up this
great request. There are thoughts of having up my whole Regim=t=
and consequently yo=r= troop up to the guards here. Itt may bee
you may see a cleere call to come w=th= them, and give the
Churches here a visitt. Wee hope if you come it will be in the
fullnesse of y=e= Gospell, upon w=ch= accompt you cannot but bee
welcome to the spiritual S'=ts= and to mee (tho unworthy to be
reckoned amongst them) you will be upon all accompts most deerly
welcome, who am 
   Yo=r= brother in o=r= deere Lord.
   T. H.
9 m. 30 d. 1652

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 219>
[^JOHN JONES TO PHILIP JONES^]
To Col=l= Philip Jones, one of y=e= Coun~ell,
Deare ffreind,
   Thy Brother gives me a cordiall acco=t= of your retaining mee
in your memory. I blesse the Lord that any who feare him have
mee in the least measure in their thoughts for good unto mee.
Your greate and hon=ble= Imploym=t= doth necessarily free you
from those intercourses which your friends at other times might
expect as a favour from you, yet themselves are more obliged
then formerly to com~unicate unto you what the Lord shall putt
upon their spirits for y=e= strengthening you in your
performance of that high trust com~itted to you, upon which
account I take this boldnesse to trouble you at this tyme, not
intending to putt you to the trouble of a returne unless you
finde goode leizure for it. The suddennesse of the late change,
with the occasion and somewhat of the formality of it, doth
amuse many precious S'=ts= in this Lande, and it cannot be
rationally expected that there should be soe sudden and cleare
an aprobation in it in those that feare the Lord, as there were
in them y=t= were p'sent upon the place, and know the grounds
and Reasons of this alterac~on. ffor my owne p=t= I am very
willing to act under this Goverment those trusts that the Lord
hath or shall lay upon mee, for the good and service of my
country, soe long as the authority (under w=ch= I am) judge mee
any way serviceable; and when I shall be thought an uselesse
Instrum=t= I hope I shall willingly acquiesse and rejoyce in a
private course of life, and that the Lord will bring my gray
head in peace to my grave, and I hope most of them that serve
the Com~onwealth in Ireland have the same freedom of spirit in
them.
   If the Governm=t= be soe Established as may produce the
fruits of Righteousness, peace and love to the S'=ts= I am not
solicitous what forme or shape it hath, "when the righteous
<P 220>
are in authority the people rejoice, but when y=e= wicked
beareth Rule the people mourne." Prov. 29, 2 verse. Have a care
that you (that greate burthen of y=e= governm=t= of 3 Nac~ons
and preserveing the Interest of all the S'=ts= in the world is
fallen) aprove yo=r=selves Righteous on the acc=t= of Christ and
that you prove not a burthensome stone and a rock of offence to
his people, least he breake you with a Rodd of Iron and dash you
in pieces like a potter's vessel. You are now lead unto a
maste=r=piece of Sathan's Temptations, and are sett upon a high
pinacle, where you may see all Nac~ons, peoples and contries
bowing to you and prostituteing their riches, Splendour and all
other carnall and worldly hono=r= and contentm=t= if you will
but fall downe and worship their Prince. You have neede,
therefore, to guird your lynes with the strenght of Christ, and
engage all his people to wrastle manfully for you at the throne
of Grace, that you may be strenghtened in the power of
temptation and delivered from y=e= snare y=t= is spread before
you, remember that your life here is but a moment of tyme and
anon you must give an acco=t= whatsoever you have done in the
flesh, and the first Question will be how you have delt with the
S'=ts= of the most High when you were in your power? One glance
from the face and countenance of Christ on a poore soule in the
hower of our change, is worth all the welth pomp and hono=r= of
the world. Wee are here listening very narrowly what kinde of
persons you call to yo=r= Councell and in other Imploym=ts= of
Hono=r= and trust, and what kinde of Court you are setting up,
whether wee are like to have a Councell and Court of sober
zealous Christians (as wee hope, many of them whose name wee
have seene in print are) or whether you alloy them with a
mixture of persons carnall and persecuting spirits, and
according to w=t= you doe in these thinges the people of God
will judge how the temper of your spirits
<P 221>
and y=e= fruite of yo=r= government is like to prove. The Lord
hath not given mee the tonge of the wise, nor the pen of the
learned to administer advice, my aime is to minde you of these
thinges, as one who really and unfeignedly wisheth your welfare.
It were presumc~on in mee to desire to be p'sented to him that
is in Cheife Authority and is indeed in the front of danger, and
sett up as a Butt for envy and malice to shoote at, but truly he
is remembred in my prayers with a trembling heart for him. The
Lord preserve him in an humble, meeke and patient frame of
Spirit, zealous for Christ and cause and people. If you send mee
one lyne to reprove mee for being thus troublesome to you I
shall esteeme it a favour to
   Your antient faithfull friend (though I cannot say most
humble) servant,
   J. Jones.
Dublin, 13=th= January, 1653.

<Q JON 1653? JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 221>
[^JOHN JONES TO HUMPHREY JONES^]
   To M=r= Humphrey Jones,
Deare Brother,
   I have by my last given you an acc=t= of my inten~cons
touching my interest in the Lordshippe of Bromfield and Yale,
that I am not willing to part with it upon the Tearmes
propounded by those Gentlemen that would purchase it. I cannot,
indeed, see how my couzen Vaughan and you that are intrusted in
that purchase can convey over the interst of any man conserned
therein whose debentures are delivered up in satisfac~ion of
y=t= purchase without their consent in writing under their hands
and seales, you being only intrusted to take y=e= Estate for
their use and not to convey it away. If any of those whose
Debentures are in that purchase, have conveyed their Interest
therein to those
<P 222>
gentleman, they may enjoy soe much Interest in the Lordships as
belongs to such persons without necessitating you to prejudice
that trust reposed in you by the rest. I desire to know who
those p'sons are that have an Interest therein, and how much
each man's interest is that I may know how farr I may provide to
take in yo=r= Interest upon better tearmes, for them then what
is offered, or be otherwise more serviceable unto them. I
presume Coll=l= Mason and Majo=r= Elliot may have some
Debent=rs= in that purchase, and if soe, they are willing to put
the Interest they have therein into my hands and I presume that
there are others of them that will be willing to doe the like. I
am not much in love with such interest as holds up any
burthensome power over the people and therefore would willingly
part with all the interests I have of that nature. But the way
now proposed in this perticular tends not to ease the people of
such burthens, but rather to continue it upon them by putting it
into such hands. But my aime is to improve my owne and that
interest of those other concerned w=th= mee to the gaining of
what is really due unto us and thereby to make the people free
when they have given due satisfacc~on for what doth issue out of
their respective Estates unto us, and for y=e= end I doe propose
to myself that by the consent of all those that have their
Debentures in y=t= purchase, or by buying in their interests to
impower Com=rs= to treate with the respective Tena~nts of y=e=
Lo=pps= for the acquitting of those Rents and the emolum=ts= due
from them upon reasonable Tearmes and thereby reemburse
ourselves, and if wee must abate of the price I had rather do it
to y=e= respective Te~nants then to any other that are soe
earnest to interlope other men's interest for lucar or setting
up of a power in their hands over the people who may expect but
little ease from such Instrumen=ts=. As touching the negociation
you menc~on, I am yet free either to continue
<P 223>
or breake it of as the Lord shall incline the hearts of such as
are concerned therein, but I doe not yet see how that matter can
be brought to a speedy and comfortable period by reason of my
fixedness in this Country and the improbability of consum~ating
it w=th=out my presence and therefore I am silent in y=t=
matter, expecting an answer of a letter I lately sent into South
Wales, being unfree to bee obliged by previous condic~ons in a
matter of y=t= nature, looking upon myselfe under higher
obligac~ons in y=t= thinge then those y=t= are accustomed to be
made amongst men upon the like occasion. I pray remember me to
M=r= Courtney and Cap=t= Price, from whom I have not herd of
late, and have not any thinge to com~unicate unto them but what
I have written in my last to M=r= Courtney. Present my kinde
Love to my Sister. In haste I remayne,
   Yo=r= very affec~conate Brother,
   Jo. Jones.

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 223>
[^JOHN JONES TO MARCUS TREVOR?^]
   To Coll=l= Marke Travo=r=
Worthy S=r=
   I am informed that there is a Tene~m=t= in the Township of
Brinkinnalt neare unto y=e= Dee River, which yo=r= father S=r=
Edward Trevo=r= bought of one Winter and that yo=r= father
afterwards mortgaged the same for 400 (^l^) . with power of
redempc~on at a day long since past and y=t= yo=r= father by his
will did bequeath his interest and power of redemc~on of the
said Tene~m=t= unto you, I am further informed that the said
Ten~em=t= is worth but 30 (^l^) . p~ annu=m= and y=t= (by reason
of diverse yeares arreares of Interest upon the said mortgage,
before the mortagagee tooke possession thereof) the redempc~on
of the said Tenem=t= will amount to above 500 (^l^) . My desire
is (if you judge my request may not be
<P 224>
prejudicial to you) that you would convey unto mee or unto such
person as I shall appoint you=r= interest in, and power of
redemption of the said Ten~em=t= upon such tearmes as yourselfe
or any other indifferent man shall judge Reasonable, any man may
perceive by what I have here set downe can not be worth much in
these tymes. Yet I conceive it fitt that you should propound
yo=r= owne satisfacc~on. I desire the favou=r= from you to lett
me receive yo=r= resoluc~on in this perticular with all
convenient speede, because some affaires of myne doe something
depend upon what you shall please to doe in this. I have noe
farther to trouble you at present, but rest
   Your assured friend and servant,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin y=e= 28=th= ffebruary 1653.

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 224>
[^JOHN JONES TO PHILIP JONES^]
To Coll=l= Philip Jones.
Honor=d= ffriend,
   I humbly and heartily thanke you for yo=r= kinde letter and
wholesome advice therein.
   Haveing all this while waited for some signification of the
pleasure of them that are in authority with you, touching y=e=
late greate change in Governm=t= and heareing not one syllable
thereof, tending to require or direct such as serve you here,
what to doe thereupon, wee have at last caused the inclosed
paper to be publised, which was very solemly done this day,
being the 1=st= of ffebruary. You doe very truely observe that
there was some hesitation upon the spirits of some Godly people
heere, touching the late alteration; but those doubts were by
many dayes seekeing of Councell from y=e= Lord (I hope) well
settled. I presume you will not account them the worst freinds
to yo=r= Governm=t=
<P 225>
who are tender in enquireing after the minde of God in every
publique turne of Providence, and are not easily given to aprove
of every change, upon an implicit faith of the integrity, zeale
and wisdome of those that make such a change, and that being
settled in their judgm=ts= to aprove or acquieace in the
resolutions of those that are in power. You will value them as
farr more precious Instrum=ts= to serve their generation then
those that jump with you into the worke upon personall accompt
(if any such there be), and whereas you seeme to apprehend that
some of my good freinds and yo=rs= might missrepresent things
heere, I must needs take leave soe farr to justifye them as to
let you knowe, that since the late alteration I have not
received one letter from any of them who seemed in the late
Assembly expressing anythinge of their dissatisfac~con in that
greate Act, thereby to justifye themselves, and those others of
that Assembly which were of our Judgm=t=; although I doe knowe
that it is naturall for dissatisfac~on to rest upon the
dissenting party. If justice and Righteousnesse flowe as
streames from y=r= Governm=t= all that feare the Lord will
rejoice in it. If not, it is not the splendo=r,= greatnesse or
forme of Governm=t= that will preserve it from ruine; ffor my
owne part I have a large measure of faith to believe that the
advanceing of Righteousnesse and holynesse in these Nations is
yo=r= Ayme and Scope. I have many things to write unto you
concerning y=e= Affaires of this Land, if I conceived it proper
to trouble you with them. If you doe not forthwith settle a
Com~ittee with you, to carry on y=e= affaires of Ireland, you
will find those affaires in greate disorder shortly. I shall not
further trouble you at this tyme, but rest
   Yo=r= affec~conat freind and humble servant
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, y=e= 1=st= ffeb., 1653.

<Q JON 1653 THARRISON>
<A THOMAS HARRISON>
<G M>
<P 226>
[^THOMAS HARRISON TO JOHN JONES^]
   Major Gen=l= Harrison to Col=l= Jones.
Deare Brother.
   Though in few words, I must thank you for yo=r= last, as
manie former lines I have received full of gravitie and grace. I
was bold to read itt in open Councell, and the Generall came to
mee to know from whom it came; it was strengthening to divers.
Being resolved to have in power, men of truith, fearing and
loving our Lord, his people and Interest; the difficultie is to
gett such: (^whether my Lord onelie^) shall call them, or the
Saints should choose them; very much sweetly said both waies.
   What are yo=r= thoughts still of the Dutch? Some very deare
to the Lord, inclining much to o=r= seeking after peace from
Heb. 12, 14., Rom. 12, 18., James 3, 17. Conceiving itt would
honno=r= that greate Profession we make of Christ, and very much
of that kind; as also in refference to the Nations advantage
w=th= very much simplicitie. Others humbly thinking Christ hath
taken to himselfe his own power, begun to breake here who will
not bow, and is going on; whilst they are not free to owne his
Dispensations, neither shall wee owne them, not because they are
o=r= Enemies, but o=r= Lords. I have heard of some failing of
Captaine Price; I hint itt that you maie not trust too farre.
Praie much for us, and that o=r= worke maie be accepted of the
Lord and his people; if wee displease not there wee care not,
though wee wish to doe good to and refresh all. My endeared love
to yo=r= selfe and all Saints.
   Yo=rs= T. H.
30=th= daie, 2=d= month, 53.

<Q JON 1653 THARRISON>
<A THOMAS HARRISON>
<G M>
<P 226>
[^THOMAS HARRISON TO JOHN JONES^]
   Major Gen=l= Harrison to Col=l= Jones.
My dearely beloved and honourable in the Lord,
   Yo=r= letter of the 13=th= instant w=th= the inclosed to my
Lord Gen=ll= and seasonable warning words came safe to my hands
<P 227>
yesterdaie. The last having read in Councell, I sent to be
printed for the use of all in, or that maie come into power;
that soe directed I delivered to the Gen=ll's= hands, hoping
some use wilbee made thereof also, though I repent my not taking
a coppie.
   I presume Brother Powell acquainted you o=r= thoughts as to
the persons most in them, to serve on behalfe the Saints in
North Wales; that wee propound three for North, three for South
Wales. Hugh Courtney, John Browne, Richard Price, out of yo=r=
parts; wherein I wish the helpe of yo=r= selfe and others if wee
have erred in the men, or to confirme us therin if approved by
the most spirituall, or that you would send upp two or three
names of the most polished, in case there bee cause of anie
addition or alteration, though itt were by lott.
   Yo=r= lines are very acceptable here to manie, full of
councell and encouragem=t= as oft therefore as the Lord minds
you of us send a word. Wee are waiting on the Lord of Hoasts for
his returne from sea, a thorough stroak there might bee very
teaching and confirming of his poore servants; then perhaps for
France, Bourdeux having sent agents to crave aid against theire
King. The Lord give us heartes suitable to the time and workes
done. My deare love and service to you and yo=rs=.
   T. H.
Whitehall, 17=th= 3 m., 53.

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 227>
[^JOHN JONES TO HUMPHREY JONES^]
To Mr. Humphrey Jones.
Good Brother,
   I have not had any letters from you these two last posts. If
I had but a word how you and yo=r= family doe by every post it
would be sufficient.
   The inclosed is from Coll=l= Mason to Mr. Courtney. It is
<P 228>
desired that you should deliver it with yo=r= owne hand, because
there is inclosed a letter to Colonell Twisleton to pay you
+L1000, with thirty pounds interest, which Twisleton owes Mason,
upon a bond which Mr. Courtney hath in his custody, to deliver
up upon paym=t= of the money. Coll=l= Mason hath a desire that
the money might be in his owne disposall, and apprehensive of
the slipperyness of such a single security for soe greate a sume
in case of mortality or other alteration.
   I have written to you by y=e= Lord Henry Cromwell that I
moved him to become purchaser of y=e= Lo=pp= of Bromfield and
Yale, which he tooke in very good p=t= and perceive he hath a
very good minde to y=e= purchase. I believe he is gone in his
returne to Wrexham to see the countrey. I acquainted him that I
conceived he might buy the Lo=pp= from y=e= Sould=rs= whose
Debentures are in the purchase for about 7s. in the pound, and
for my owne interest I would leave it to himselfe to give mee
satisfac~con for it in which way he please, and have likewise
acquainted him that I have an other Debenture with the true
state thereof, and he seemed to be very desirous to be
serviceable unto me in y=t= perticular. If I might have
satisfac~con for both my Debentures in the Lands I now hold from
the Com~onwealth as Tenant of the State and other, tho' the most
congruous lands, to those lands in the counties of Dublin and
Kildare or one of them, att double the Rates in the Act for
Sould=rs= and adventurers, I should be very well satisfyed with
it, and thereby the satisfying of my Interest in Bromfield and
Yale in ready money would be avoided. The lands I now hold as
Tenant to y=e= State, are y=e= Townshipps and lands of
Newcastle, Coleman's Towne, Ashgoe, Rathcredan, Greenoge
Loughtowne, Ballinakelly, and some other small parcells mixed
with these, all of them being small Tenem=ts= and not one
gentleman's house, or farme house,
<P 229>
orchard or garden, standing upon them, but were wholy wast when
I tooke them, haveing not within three myles of them neither
wood, turfe, nor any other fuell, nor a River, saveing one
little Brooke, soe small that I thinke a Trowt cannot live in
it, neither is there any mill there to turne, soe that if I had
it I conceive noe man would envy mee for it. These lands stand
upon the moares of the county of Kildare, and the next adjoyning
lands on to mee in Kildare is the Towne and lands of Castle
Lyons, a poore place inhabited by Irish, and part of it
intermixed with the lands in my possession. I am the more
p~ticular in this matter that in case you finde any inclination
to have any kinde of this nature done for my satisfac~con, you
may be furnished with soe many perticulars and certaintyes as I
can at present give to direct the drawing of such an Act or
order for mee from his Highness and his Councell, as shall be
advised by Councell. It may be I shall have further occasion to
trouble you in this matter by the next. I cannot see any
possibility to avoid it, but that the Lo=pp= is purchased with
our Debentures which are delivered in, cancelled, and that none
else can have any clayme in it, for now we have noe security but
our purchase, and the rest have their Debentures in their hands,
which they may make sayle of or take satisfac~con for, and I
cannot prevent it. Suppose that in this +L2000, only +L600
should be accounted and allowed unto mee upon the purchase, how
should I be secured y=e= rest, my Debenture is cancelled; and if
it be said that I shall have a share in their Debentures which
are comprehended in the letter of attorney, are not many of them
sold away? And what proportion should I have out of every man's
Debenture, and how shall those proporc~ons be secured unto mee?
seeing I must not have their Debentures in my owne keeping, and
how many besides myselfe must have the like share out of every
man's Debenture. The fancy
<P 230>
of intituling all the Brigade to y=e= purchase made with our
Debentures hath neither reason, nor possibility of practice in
it, without apparent loss and confusion. It may be wee might
have the favour of haveing our money upon the Exise paid in
intirely, if you have not made sayle thereof already. I am now
in hast. My service to my sister.
   Yo=r= loving Brother,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, y=e= 24=o= March, 1653.

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 230>
[^JOHN JONES TO ELLIS HUGHES^]
   To Cozen Ellis Hughes.
Deare Cousen.
   I have received divers letters from you, whereby I find your
sincere affecion towards me, and in your care and deligence in
my affaires farr to exceed any of those obligac~ons your letters
menc~on. I doe very well approve of what you have done in
letting Malloyd lands w=ch= was in M=res= Davies hands to
another, and likewise of what else you doe, and have done in my
concernm=ts=, as being acted by an honest, sincere heart, and
with much more discretion then I could have done had I beene
present. As for Elec~cons to a new representative, I believe the
gentlemen you menc~on who were so early stirring are exceedingly
deceived in their hopes and expectac~ons; for my owne parte I
would hold it a greate mercy (and that w=ch= my heart would
willingly embrace), to be att libertie to live in the most
retired and private course of life that I am capable of, and I
am perswaded I shall rejoyce in it, when the Lord shall call me
to such a condic~on, and therefore I shalbee as farr from
thinking myselfe worthy or fitt to serve my countrey in soe
criticall a tyme as this is, (wherein the wisest men cannot see
farr, and the best of men hath scarce
<P 231>
faith enough to wayte on the eternall blessed God in his
outgoings in those hidden and secret pathes, wherein His
Providence hath led his people of late dayes), as I shalbee from
declining to serve them, in any capacity, when I am thereunto
called. If my service hath in any thing beene acceptable unto my
country, I desire that the Lord may have the praise, who is the
author, and with whose Heiffer I ploughed and laboured in these
affaires, w=ch= concerned the welfare of my countrey (myselfe
being but a weake inconciderable instrum=t=), I meane the godly
people of Wales, who I am afraid are too much despised and
derided in oure poore countrey. But I hope that now the time is
come that the Sunne of Righteousnes shall arise with healing
under his wings for our poore nation, to turne them from
darkness to his marvelous light, and from the power of Satan
unto God. I understand my friends in Merrionythshire are in
arreares to mee for rent, because of the badnesse of the
Marcatts for cattle, I therefore would be willing to take leane
cattle of them; I meane two and three yeare old heifferss, and
runts and lambes, if they might be gott to Hollihead, from
whence I could have them fetched over. I know not how feazible
this may bee, and therefore propound it onely. I have excellent
feeding ground here, but cannot gett stocke here to putt upon
it.
   I have received late letters from y=e= Lord Com=n= Whittlocke
on behalfe of his nephew Mostyn, to have the mannor of Gogarth
sould unto him, wherein he was very earnest, and I am not
willing to parte with it untill I am fully satisfyed what my
Interest there is. I am informed that upon y=e= La: Mostyn's
death their terme is expired, because the last lease was taken
after y=e= Bishopps were put downe, and this I am confident is
true, as well in this case as in Mr. Mostyn of Rhyd's case, and
others, whose leases Col. Twisleton avoyded; but how to find it
out is the difficulty.
<P 232>
I pray make what enquiry you can after it. I am p'swaded there
are some p'sons in Anglesey that can make it out, and will do it
for reward, wherein I would not have you be sparing.
   Secondly, I am informed that all, or most of Gloddeth
belongeth to me, as being of the mannor of Gogarth, and that
Gogarth is worth +L300 p~ annum. How probable this may be I know
not. If you could by any meanes recover the Bookes and Records
of the Bish=pp= and Chapters much of these things would be
discoovered; likewise there have beene many settlem=ts= of the
Mostyn's estates, and ffines upon them, whereby it appeare what
freehold they had there. Likewise inquirie might be made from
whom and when the Mostyn's purchased any lands there (for they
cannot pretend to any great antiquity there), and if from noe
man that was a freeholder there, or by noe purchase but the
B=pps= lease, then it carries a strong presumption with it that
they have noe freehold there, w=ch= Mr. Whittlocke's
earnestnesse seemes to mak out unto me. I believe the Recorders
of ffines for that countrey may give some light, and Mr. John
Maddocks, and many other p'sons in that neighbourhood can
discover the wholle trueth, although I doe not expect it from
any of them untill God p'swaed their conscience that it is their
duty to bring trueth to light. I pray use those wayes and meanes
your genious will lead you unto to find out these things, and
returne what you conceive on the wholle to
   Your most affec~conate and faithful cosen to serve you
   J. J.
Dublin, 24th May, 1653. To cosin Ellis Hughes.

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 233>
[^JOHN JONES TO MR. POORE^]
To M=r= Poore.
Worthy S=r=
   I acknowledge myselfe much engaged to you for your respects
to mee, which I find menc~oned in your letter of the 12=th=
present. As to what you propound of a lease of Chappell Izard
and your other lands theere, to be granted for 12 yeares, att
200 (^l^) p~ annum without deduc~con, I shall presume to give
you this account - first, that you doe not seeme clearly to
understand neither y=e= quantity nor condic~on of your Estate
heere; as to y=e= quantity I am p'swaded that all y=e= lands you
have on both sides of the River will not amount, according to 21
foote to y=e= Pearch (which is the measure of this Countrey),
unto 600 Acres, and that y=e= same would not have yielded in the
best of tymes to have beene lett at Rack for five shillings the
acre, one w=h= another, of all which there is about one halfe of
the lands runne over with Furres in this tyme of warr, and will
yield little or noe profitt without very great charge to stubb
up the ffurrs, and Cantrells Towne being could wett ground,
yields little grasse for want of trenching; The meadows being
but a very small quantity all plowed up, and thereby the profitt
of them much diminished; The howses in the Towne and the Mill
and Damme and Bankes are very much out of repaire, and will in a
short tyme (if more charge be not layd out upon them, then a
Tenant for few yeares can doe or can be expected from him) fall
to ruine. Secondly, I conceive that you have not the condic~on
of affaires heere truly represented unto you; there is now
goeing out of your Estate, in monthly assessm=ts= above 30=s=
every weeke, and I thinke somewhat more, and this is not by one
third p=t= soe much as is upon it in y=e= Winter; there is
(besides this) for provision of hay, fire, straw and candle, a
considerable charge, but the certainty of that I have not yet
learned, which charge in the whole will amount to little
<P 234>
lesse than 100 (^l.^) p~ annum. And, I speake it sincerely, I
doe not expect to live soe longe as to have the assessm=ts=
abated upon those Lands, ffor y=e= monthly supplyes from
England, for maintenance of the fforces here, is thirty thousand
pounds p~ month, and there can be noe expectac~on of abatem=t=
in Ireland, until England be first freed from sending any
supplyes thence; and it is not imaginable by any that knowes the
condic~on of affaires here that wee can disband soe many of our
fforces, as the supplyes from England payes, and therefore if
those supplys be withdrawne before we can spare it, the
assessm=ts= must of necessity be raised heere, for you cannot
expect y=t= this land (after so Generall a Revolt and soe
thorough a warr) can be in any securety without an army in the
field, the garrisons well manned, which are in number at this
instant above 440 garrisons. Haveing faithfully layd the state
of things before you, I shall informe you that my purpose was
(if you would have granted mee those Tearmes I propounded) to
have endeavoured to bring your ground into heart by Lymeing and
some other lasting Improvem=t= and therein and in those other
defects before menc~oned to have beene at some considerable
charge, which in soe short a time as I have I cannot expect any
suitable returne; and therefore if you please to grant mee a
lease thereof for 12 or 14 yearse att 100 (^l.^) p~ annum
certaine and without deduction, and the lease to begin from May
day last as you propound, or else for 21 yeares at the same
Rent, giveing you 100 (^l.^) fine or incomb, and to be bound not
to alien or sell my Tearme or lease without your license, I
shall willingly become your Tenant for y=t= time and upon those
Tearmes, and I hope I shall be as faithfull in p'forming with
you as any you deale withall. If not, I am content with the tyme
I have, and shall never give you any further trouble in this
matter; and were it not for y=e= pleasure of y=e= River and
conveniency of
<P 235>
the howse to remove into in the tyme of sicknesse, I had never
menc~oned it unto you at the first - there being 3 parts of 4 in
Ireland wast for want of Inhabitants to plant it, and y=e= best
Lands in Ireland may be had for inhabiting. And as the people
finde securety to plant abroad further off, the Rates of the
lands about Dublin will fall. As to the Question upon y=e= lands
of S=t= Lawrence, I have made entry upon it as your Tenant, and
have taken coppyes of the Records by which the lands passed from
the Crowne; but the Estate passed from S=r= R. Newcomen to yo=r=
Brother is not Record, nor any livery upon it, which is a
defect, as your Lawiers will inform you. I shall endeavour to
right you in y=t= matter, without much charge to you, and alsoe
myselfe, as being conserned for my tyme. I shall speake w=th=
your Couzen Peaseley, concerning the Arreares you menc~on, and
returne what account I have from him. I remayne,
   Yo=r= assured friend to serve you,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 31 May, 1653.

<Q JON 1653? JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 235>
[^JOHN JONES TO MR. COURTNEY^]
To Mr. Courtney.
Deare Friend,
   Yo=rs= of the 7=th= present, and therein the testimony of the
Lord's blessed presence with us and our cause in the last fight,
betwixt the ffleets at Sea, hath much raised our spirits to a
rejoicing frame. The Lord God give us meaknesse humbly to walke
worthy of such mercys, and direct such as have the power of the
Nation in their hands to improve the appearances of the Lord
with them, to the praise of his greate name, and to the pulling
down of the Mann of Sin and its tiranicall and wicked powers, as
well in the hearts and spirits of his people (driving them to
bitter disputes
<P 236>
and dividing principles about formes and shadowes, and to y=e=
exercising of faith which worketh by love, and improving gospell
ordinances for the building of the new creature) is in those
outward powers, with the anti-christian [^BLANK^] hath for many
yeares exersized over the estates, bodys and conciences of men.
It hath seemed good unto the Lord to suffer most bitter pulpitt
contentions to arise amongst us about the circumstance of an
ordinance when to be administered, both sides engaging their
poore hearers to a necessity of building their faith upon what
they respectively assert, before they can be accounted members
of the Church of Christ or of the house of God, and one side
positively denying com~union in other ordinances as members of
the Church of Christ, with any of the contrary judgm=t= because
they make a non-conformity in Judgm=t= (though otherwise never
soe holy and gracious) to be a disorderly walking I look upon as
a Tiranizing over y=e= contiences of their bretheren. I hope
y=t= God is putting an end to these contenc~ons, which bringeth
nothing but barrenesse and leanesse to y=e= soule and provoketh
neither to love nor good workes. I am loath to be too tedious on
this theame. I desire to heare from you often.
   Yo=r= assured ffriend,
   Jo. Jones

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 237>
[^JOHN JONES TO THOMAS HARRISON^]
Col=l= Jones to Major Gen=ll= Tho. Harrison, 
Most precious friend,
   I forbeare herein to use the greate titular addicions due to
you, that I may speake the language of the present
<P 238>
temper of my heart, which I desire to doe in this hower of
temptation in simplicity and faithfulness.
   My spirit hath beene of late much saddened by an apprehention
of grevious heart Divissions, which to me seemed to be amongst
the people of God in Ireland, upon the Accompt of differing in
judgm=t= about y=e= circu~stances of an outward Administracon.
But y=e= confidence I had that the Lord would make those persons
who (upon y=e= accompt of being more Religeous, more meeke in
spirit, and more selfe denying than those y=t= went before
them), were called together to act the Supreme authority of the
Nac~on, would be instrum=ts= of healing of and repayrors of the
Breaches amongst the people of God, supported me in hope to live
to see those occasions of Divisions removed, and y=t= Rubish
(which hinders the cementing of Christian spirits), was hed
away, by y=e= swete and plesant Streame, those Rivers of
pleasures, the powerfull love of God in Christ to the Saints
begetting in their Spirits an overflowing of p'fect love towards
one another and striveing by a holy emulac~ion, who should
exceede each other in offices of Love and spirit of humility.
But Deare friend it hath been declared unto us to the exceeding
greate greife of some that there are Contentions and Divisions
amongst you; the choisest and most singularly elected Parliam=t=
that ever was in England. Without question our contentions and
divisions proceede from our lusts. And the raigning lusts
amongst professors are pride, coveteousnesse, and hypocrasie, O
therfore watch over yo=r= owne hearts that those lusts may not
lodg there. It is a sadd thing to reade what is writ from
England, that the very face of authority is worn out, and the
hopes and expectation of the Saints frustrated through yo=r=
Divisions, you are reputed to be men fearing God, that being the
character by which you were made choice of, and therefore men at
a distance cannot conceive that those Civill interests
<P 239>
which divided Councells formerly is the cause of yo=rs= But
rather guesse yo=rs= growes by Diversity of Judgm=ts= about
formes or Administrac~ons tending to Religious worship, And how
farr the Civill power and authority of Armies and supreme
Councells professing Christ have warrant to contest in these
disputes, to the dividing of their power, defacing their
authority, and endangering the involving of a Nac~on in blood,
and exposing them to the cruelty of y=e= Com~on Enemy to y=r=
scandall and dishon=r= of y=e= Lord Jesus, and scattering of his
Church, is not difficult to Judg, and y=t= will be the issue of
yo=r= divisions if the Lord in mercy prevent not; O therfore for
y=e= Lord Jesus sake strive for a spirit of humility, and
meeknesse, and strive with all y=e= powers, and faculties of
Soull to unite y=e= hearts of all the S'=ts= in Love and holy
Com~union, and walking together, and lett it never be sayd that
the Com~union of S'=ts= once an Article of our Creede, is
neither in the faith nor practice of the S'=ts= in England, I
wish and earnestly pray, that these my weake apprehensions, or
feares may have no grounds to warrant them. But I hope the Lord
hath given you a Spirit not to dispize small things, and y=t=
you are fully p'swaded that I am one who unfaignedly loves you
in the highest and sweetest Bonds, and in love will be alwayes
found,
   Yo=r= most faithful and reall freind and servant in Christ
Jesus, 
   Jo. Jones.
Dated 11th August, 1653.
   Major Gen=ll= Hardresse Waller presents you with his humble
services.

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 243>
[^JOHN JONES TO MR. POORE^]
To Mr. Poore.
Worthy S=r=
   Yours of y=e= 29th of August came to my hands few dayes
since, whereby I finde that you clayme to be in arreares to
<P 244>
you from M=r= W=ms.= and Com=y= some Rent which is abated in
leiu of St. Lawrence Lands, which hath beene kept from them and
M=r= Peasley, y=e= Terten~ant, by the Ten~ants of Palmerstowne,
under pretence of the State's Interest. I have sent for the
Gentlemen, and upon conference with them all together I find
that the Rent abated as abovesaid is in M=r= Peishe's hands,
which he conceives due unto him upon y=e= grounds aforesaid. And
whereas you alledge in your letter y=t= S=t= Lawrence Lands is
not comprised in the Lease, they alledge that y=e= contrary is
very apparent, as well by some letters of your owne as by the
Lease itselfe, which compriseth all y=e= Lands and Estate which
the Lord Valentin had in the County of Dublin, belonging to or
enjoyed with the Lands of Chappell Izard, and that there was a
former Lease made thereof unto one Walker, by the Lord Valentin
or yourselfe, which about the tyme of the sealing of the Lease
you acquainted M=r= W=ms.= with, and told him then that if
Walker should come to clayme that Lease, he should pay the Rent
thereapon to M=r= W=ms.= and his assignes. And they further
alledge that Cantwells Towne, Irish Towne, and diverse other
Lands comprised in the said Lease are not therein perticularly
named, and may as well be said not to be in the said Lease as
y=e= Lands of S=t= Lawrence. Upon the whole matter I humbly
offer my opinion that you cannot well insist upon y=t= Argum=t=
and that it will not be worth your trouble to contest with the
Gentleman that marryed your kinswoman (and whose present
condic~on is not very plentifull) for soe small a matter,
especially considering how serviceable she hath beene to you in
the Hazarding of her owne life in y=e= preservac~on of your
howse from being destroyed by y=e= Enemy. M=r= Peisley will pay
you now 33=l.= 8=s.= being in full of the last half yeares Rent
ending at May last, there being therout deducted for S=t=
Lawrence 7=l.= 10=s.= and 9=l.= 2=s.= for Assessm=ts= falling
upon the
<P 245>
Rent, and which makes up the 50=l.= If you be not satisfyed with
this acco=t= Mr. Peisley is content to referr the Determinac~on
thereof to any indifferent persons upon the place. But he hopes
you will not putt him to that trouble, but rather expected some
larger favo=r= or respects from you. He hath desire me to move
that you would send him the Covenants you have from M=r= W=ms.=
and his Comyt=e= or an effectual discharge of them, else he will
be troubled by M=r= W=ms.= he being engaged to discharge him. As
touching my own p'ticular I have written to M=r= Dan Lloyd at
large.
   I remayne,
   Your affecc~onate freind to serve you,
   J. J.
Dublin, y=e= 15=th= Oct., 1653.

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 245>
[^JOHN JONES TO MORGAN LLOYD^]
To M=r= Morgan Lloyd.
   Dublin, 30=th= Sept., 1653.
Deare Friend,
   I intend to send you herewith one or more coppyes of your
paper printed, wherein (although there was much care taken in
the correction) yet through the unskilfullnesse of the composer
of y=e= presse, and correctors you will finde that many errors
have escaped us, but I hope none very consequentiall. I intend
to send over the bookes to Majo=r= Swift, from thence you may
order the disposall of them as you please. I confesse the
discourse is exceedingly good and spirituall according to my
understanding, yet my selfe and many other sober wise Christians
heere conceive that if it had beene penned in a language or
still lesse parabolicall, and in more plane Scripture
expressions, it would be more usefull. Babes must be fed with
milk. There was one out of my family with you lately, whose
report and a paper sent him from my boy makes some of our
freinds
<P 246>
heere feare that you in Wales have layed aside all gospell
ordinances, and particularly that of prayer. I know the
reporter's temper, and therefore lay not any waight upon it,
(and the paper haveing neither the gravity, sobriety, and meeke
temper of yo=r= spirit in y=e= language of it, but like Jobes
freinds too quick in sensureing what could not be in y=e=
cognizance of y=e= pen man) I esteeme not as an evidence in this
matter honer=d= I desire you to send me an account of y=e= state
and condic~on of y=e= S'=ts.= and Church of God in Wales, and
especially with you, and w=t= your p'sent practice is, y=t= y=e=
mouth of the adversary may be stopped, and y=t= those y=t= feare
y=e= Lord may rejoice with you and for you, and may glorifye our
father w=ch= in heaven.
   J. J.

<Q JON 1653 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 246>
[^JOHN JONES TO DANIEL LLOYD^]
To M=r= Daniell Lloyd, att Wrexham.
Deare ffriend,
   I have sealed the Bond and the Counterpart which you sent mee
concerning Chappell Izard. But indeed I am troubled y=t= y=e=
Gentleman is so unhandsome as to insist upon my Brother Kyffin
and you to be suretyes for mee when I pay such a fine for soe
short a tyme, and more for his Land then any man in these tymes
will give. The conveniency of the howse is all that is
desireable in the Bargaine, and very usefull for mee, but
burthensome to a Tennant that is to live by his farme. You will
finde by the enclosed what Rent is due to M=r= Poore from his
former Tennant, and y=e= reasons of the Defalcation. The same
defalcac~on falls upon this halfe yeare, soe that the whole due
to him att this tyme is 66=l.= 16=s.= which I will and must pay
him. I have besides the defalcac~on abovesaid layed
<P 247>
out about 3=l.= in searching for and takeing out Coppyes of the
Records to make out his Tytle to St. Laurence, which he out to
repay, although I cannot insist upon it in this Account, and
untill I have my lease I am not enabled to trye the tytle, being
as yett but a Ten~ant to an Assignee, and for soe short a tyme
as will not beare the trouble of a suite. The possession is kept
from mee to this day, the Corne carryed of y=e= ground, and at
this tyme they sowe winter Corne there, and it may be with more
confidence then formerly, because he that detaineth the
Possession is a Parliam=t= man, and therefore not soe open to be
molested with suites. But although this may raise under
Ten~ants' confidence, yet I rest assured the Gentleman will make
noe such use of his Imployment. I cannot remember, nor doe I
believe that I have made M=r= Power a promise to pay him 100=l.=
for this yeare nowe past, without suitable condic~ons propounded
to be had from him. I did desire from him a Lease of 21 years,
and had that beene granted mee then, which was about May, I had
beene able to have done somewhat, in order to the recovery of
the Land in Controversie, and to have payd this last halfe
yeares Rent without deduction for the same. I am afraid I have
beene over troublesome unto you in this matter, which makes mee
be thus large with you, at this tyme that my Brother Kyffin and
you may putt a periodd unto it as you judge best. I thanke you
for the account you gave me of the S'=ts= Church of God with
you, and blessed be our Lord that preserves you from being
entangled with y=e= snares of the Serpent, and leads you out
with soe much zeale and fervency of spirit to avoid contentions
and strife, and to provoake the people of God to unity and love,
which are the bonds of peace and p=r=fection. My enquiry after
you proceeded from a desire I had to be enabled to give some
Godly freinds heere an Account of you, and thereby to remove
their jealousy which reports
<P 248>
had begot in them. M=r= Thimbleton and M=r= Rogers can give you
an account of the state and temper of Professo=rs= heere, unto
whose relation I refer you, and rest,
   Your very affec~conat freind,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 18=th= October, 1653.

A note to be inclosed in M=r= Dan. Lloyd's Letter.
As touching the half yeares rent due from M=r= Peaseley ending
at May last, he saith he will not pay any more then what is sett
downe in the letter, without it be recovered by law. And really
in my judgm=t= he ought to have allowance for S=t= Laurence
lands, it being kept from him, and the other sum in a tax sett
upon the recet by vertue of any gen=ll= order made for relief of
Tenants, and is deducted by all landlords. And there is the same
reason for the last half yeare. However I leave that to my
Brother Kyffin and you to compromise as you see cause.
   Your assured friend,
   J. J.
18=th= October, 1653.

<Q JON 1653 PSTERRY>
<A PETER STERRY>
<G M>
<P 248>
[^PETER STERRY TO JOHN JONES^]
From M=r= Sterry to John Jones.
Noble Sir,
   I have received, October the 15=th=, a sweete and X~an letter
from you in which you express a love and esteeme of one of the
lowest members in the Body of Christ beyond what he deserveth,
you alsoe shew a deep understanding in the two greate evils of
these tymes, which agree in a Carnality but differ in this, one
layes the weight of religion upon an outward forme, the other
setts up a Mistery of Eniquity in the inward ffancy and
imagination by which it
<P 249>
takes away all forme of Religion in the outward man and
confounds light with darknesse, good with Evill, Sperit with
fflesh, Time with Eternity, God with the Creature, nay with the
Devill, the first sort Savour not any mistery, and depth in the
Gospell, the other turne the deepe things of God into the depths
of Satan. I shall say noe more of the first sort, save onely
that these things are shadowes and Christ is the Body, the
kingdome of God consisteth not of these thinges but in
Righteousnesse, the Righteousnesse of God which is Spirituall,
and the originall the Righteousnesse of God which is the Morall,
and the Coppy or Image of the other, grace, joy in the Holy
Ghost, he y=t= doth these things shall be accepted of God and
approved of men, that is, shall be justifyed in the day of all
divine and humane principles, whether he eate or eate not, soe
it be to the Lord, to Charity and Dedification, but if any man
be contentious about these things, I finde noe such custome nor
any encouragem=t= to it, to flowe from the spirit and face of
our Lord Jesus in my soule. But if any man would bringe the
S'=ts= into Bondage to such ordinances as p'ish in the useing,
hee seemes not to be thoroughly instructed in the power of
Christes death or the virtue of his resurrection, by which a
living way is made into the most holy place, thorow the rending
of the vaile of fflesh ffor the other sort of Principles they
have had their ffirst beginnings in Christianity at Symon Magus
who called himselfe the supreame vertue and power, that is the
father and carryed about with him a Trumpett which he said was
the supreame wisdome or understanding on which the Angells were
begotten, according to these Principles by Majicke he served
himselfe of the Rulers of the Darknesse of this world, and by
Sensuallity fed himselfe without feare, upon all visible
instrum=ts= of Voluptuousnesse. S=r= the bottome of those
principles unvailed of all their Maskeing,
<P 250>
Mysterious Language, is this, that there is noe God but the
spirit of this visible world, noe other state or appearance of
things besides this visible image, noe other Eternity save a
perpetuall succession of Generation and Corruption, noe Angells
besides the various imaginations of men or man himselfe, that
all this is God, The spirit of this world as it is in the whole
world is the father. Tho it is in every or any P'ticular man or
appearance is Jesus Christ; that this is the everlasting Gospell
to knowe this, that all is God, that wee are God, that
everything is God, and upon this account to be alike free to all
thinges, and this is Heaven and spiritually on the other side to
thinke that anythinge is sin, that there is a Heaven, a Hell, a
God beyond this image of thinges, this alone is darkenesse, and
Hell and the Devill, that when wee dye o=r= spirits are
swallowed up into the spiritt of this world, which is our
returne to the ffather and our Bodyes change into some other
naturall forme of plant, beaste or the like.
   But S=r= that which I have seene or learned in the light of
Christ is this, that there is one God the father of whome are
all thinges, who alsoe is three, the ffather, the word and
Spiritt. This is he who Inhabiteth Eternity, who is invisable,
incomprehensible to the eye and understanding of every Creature,
whom the Heavens of Hevons cannot hold, those heavens which are
farr more above these visible heavens, of Sunn Moon and Starrs,
than these are above this spott of earth, that there is one
Jesus the immortall Word, by in and for whom all things were
created invisible and visible; this Jesus is God and soe equall
to the ffather, one with the ffather he descended into fflesh,
soe he became lesse then the ffather, and was obedient to him
through the Crosse, Resurrection, and Assention, he putt of
fflesh returned to the ffather in our nature, which he changed
ffrom fflesh into spiritt, conformeing it p'fectly to the divine
<P 251>
nature makeing it in Soule and Body one Spiritt with God the
ffather, and yet keeping it in its owne propriety as a distinct
Spiritt from him. This same Jesus as the Lord from Heaven, as a
quickening spirit descends into the soules of his Saints,
reveales himselfe and the ffather there formes himselfe in them,
conformes them to himself, purgeth them by degrees from all
polutions of flesh and spirit, carryes on the felloweship of his
sufferings death and resurrection in them, until he have made
them spiritt of his spiritt, one spirit with himselfe and y=e=
ffather, first in Soule, finally at the last day in Body alsoe.
Thus his prayer is heard that his Saints may be where he is and
may be made p'fect in one, as the ffather and he are one. In the
meane tyme while wee are in fflesh wee are imperfect and weake
in spirit, wee are besett with a weight of sin which easily
presseth us downe, and haveinge the first fruits of the spiritt
wee still grone under this body of sin and death, though of a
truth wee bye the eye of faith see ourselves already p'fect in
the ffather and in Christ above, as alsoe the ffather and Christ
liveing in us, yet this sight of faith is butt in part, this
life of the ffather and of Christ is but in its infancy, in a
riddle in much obscurety and imp'fection in us, y=t= we cannot
but continually say that the father and Christ are farr greater,
and if wee thinke wee knowe anythinge, or are anythinge, wee
knowe nothing as wee ought to knowe, wee are nothing. S=r= since
I received yours I have beene in Phisick and now write in much
infirmity of Body. I hope if the Lord p~mitt, to write more on
this subject the next weeke.
   Your most Humble and obliged servant,
   Peter Sterry.
Whitehall October 24=th= 1653.

<Q JON 1654 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 252>
[^JOHN JONES TO PHILIP JONES^]
To Coll=l= Philip Jones.
Deare and Hon=ord= ffreind.
   The office of these lynes are only to acknowledge yo=r=
kindnesse towards an undeserving creature, manifested in yo=r=
readynesse to take notice of any concernm=t= of myne to my
advantage, as I have found it in my former experiences of you,
and hath beene fully presented to mee lately by my Brother. Such
offices of friendship and respect are y=e= more generous and
acceptable when extended to such as cannot, or proceeds from
such as neede not answerable retaliation. It is the Blessed
temper of y=e= spirit of y=e= Lord Jesus Christ in his S'=ts= to
be ready and willing to serve one another in
<P 253>
love, and it is a precious mercy to such as feare the Lord when
such as are in supreame authority have such a frame and temper
of spirit in them. I have bene (by many providences to mee),
raised from the dust to sit and act in places too high for mee,
wherein I have found snares upon my spirit, to be lifted up in
high thoughts of myselfe, and like a wanton Dame sitting on a
Hill, to be regardlesse and compassionatlesse of those who in
their outward stations seeme belowe mee. But my often minding
the aboundance of humility, love and compassion that was
manifested in the Lord Jesus, and ought to be in his members,
and the little distance and dissimilitude that is betweene mee
and the worst of men, hath beene a meanes through grace to keepe
mee in some measure of sobriety.
   Deare S=r=. The interest you are pleased to grant mee in you
I shall freely make use of as often as any occasion of myne
shall call mee unto it, with this assurance that (if in
anythinge I shall be found immodest or pertiall, as most men are
in their owne concernm=ts=) you will be pleased to favo=r= mee
soe farr as to smother it, before my weakness be made more
publiqe, and to that end if my Brother waite upon you oftener
than is meete to lay it to my account. I pray present my service
to deare Mr. Scobell, he is an humble, loving soule, with whom I
could comfortably spend all the dayes of my life. I remayne
   Yo=rs= faithfully to serve you,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, the 13th Aprill, 1654.

<Q JON 1654 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 253>
[^JOHN JONES TO OLIVER CROMWELL^]
(To Oliver Cromwell, Protector.)
May it please yo=r= Highness.
   Having observed to what issue that hon=ble= and liberall
intention of the late Parliam=t=, and since of yo=r= Highnesse
<P 254>
and yo=r= Councell (towards widdowes and orphans whose
respective arreares amount not to above 150), is like to come
to, by reason of the indigency of the persons to whom such debts
are due, many of them offering for the supply of their p'sent
wants to make sale of their Debentures for 5s. in the pound, and
thereby to transferr that greate advantage of yo=r= Highnesse
indulgence, and beneficence towards them, unto such who have
raised themselves from nothing to greate estates by the troubles
of the tymes, wherein many of them probably minded themselves
more then the publiqe interest. I made bould to com~unicate my
thoughts in that matter to my Lord Gen=ll= ffleetwood, who was
pleased to advise mee to present the same to yo=r= Highnes; and
had not I had his com~and for it I had not presumed to give you
this trouble. The Baronyes appointed for satisfacc~on of y=e=
said widdowes and orphans are pretty large in extent, and have
some of the best seates in Ireland in them, and if they were
exposed to sale, would yeld in ready money (as most men that are
knoweing in affaires of that nature doe judge), double the value
they are sett for to the widdowes, and yet if sett out in Lands
will be of little value to them, because their respective
proporc~ons will be soe inconsiderable as that noe man will
deale with them for the same but upon very low tearmes, and
their poverty will not admitt them to plant the same, and
consequently their interest will become a prey to other men;
ffor prevention whereof I humbly propound that such persons as
yo=r= Highnes shall thinke fitt to trust, may be impowered to
pay y=e= arreares of the said widdowes and orphans (or of as
many of them as desire it), in ready money, and take assignm=ts=
to yo=r= Highnes use of the said debts, and of their interest to
lands for the same, within y=e= said Baronyes, and that said
persons soe intrusted may be likewise impowered to make sale of
soe much of the lands within the
<P 255>
said Baronyes as shall reimburse the said money; ffor the
carrying on of this work, I humbly conceive that there will not
neede much money to be issued before money come in by sayle, and
that may be borrowed out of yo=r= grand Tres=ry= heere for a
short tyme, to be repaided by sayle as aforesaid. By this meanes
the poore widdowes and orphans will have more plenary
satisfacc~on, and more to their content, than by lands in the
way prescribed, and I am p'swaded that halfe the lands appointed
for their satisfacc~on, and those of the best Seates will be
reserved for yo=r= Highnesse disposal, and it were pitty that
some Seates in those Baronyes should be dismembered. If yo=r=
Highnesse aproves of this course or any other for the end herein
proposed, I humbly conceive that it will not be adviseable to
delay it, because poore people will be pressing for liberty to
sell their Debentures, or contriveing some other way by private
contracts, to make sayle of their Interests when lands are sett
out on to them. All which I humbly leave to yo=r= Highnesse
wisdome, to signifye yo=r= pleasure in, as you shall judge most
meete, and rest,
   Yo=r= Highnes most humble servant,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, the 17th Aprill, 1654.

<Q JON 1654 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 255>
[^JOHN JONES TO HENRY CROMWELL^]
To y=e= Lord Henry Cromwell.
Right Hon=ble=
   I have beene advised by my L=d= Gen=ll= ffleetwood to write
the inclosed to his Highnes, which I humbly desire yo=r= Lo=pp=
to p'sent, It concernes the three Baroneys appointed for
satisfacc~on of the arrears of Widdowes and Orphans, wherein I
humbly conceive just satisfacc~on may be given to the partyes
concerned, and more to their content and profitt then their
haveing of lands, yet halfe the land of these Baroneyes and the
best Seates in them reserved for
<P 256>
his Highnes to dispose of, I am not in a condition to buy lands,
because fallen in debt since the Lord tooke away my wife, and
therefore am free from any other end in this matter then his
Highnes service. If in this or any other matter I can be
serviceable to his Highnesse or yo=r= Lo=pp= upon p~sonall or
private acc=t= I am afraid it is my snare to be ever ambitious
of y=e= honor of such com~ands, I beseech you be not discouraged
in proceeding to y=r= purchase of y=e= Lo=pps= of Bromfield and
Yale, I dare assure you it is the cheapest purchase you can have
in all those p=ts= of England for soe little money as it shall
stand you in, and as certaine a Revenue as compleate a com~and
as I knowe in all those parts, what interest I have in it I
wholly submitt to yo=r= disposal, and am perswaded S=r= James
ffarrington will be glad to receive the money which he p=d= for
the feefarme Rents, I make bold to menc~on this thinge because I
have not received any acc=t= from by brother touching that
matter. The Lord fill you with his spirit of love and meeknesse
that the desires of all that love and feare his name may be
towards you, which att the throne of grace shall be the desires
and prayers of
   Yo=r= Lo=pps= most humble Servant,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin the 17=th= Aprill, 1654.

<Q JON 1656 THARRISON>
<A THOMAS HARRISON>
<G M>
<P 256>
[^THOMAS HARRISON TO JOHN JONES^]
Major Gen=ll= Harrison to Col=l= Jones.
Highgate 12=th=d. 5=th=m. 56.
My deerely beloved in o=r= Lord,
   Yo=r= large and loveing letter dated 6=th=d. of the 3=rd=m.
came not to my hands till a full month after, and then found me
under trouble of so manie kinds (upon my Fathers decease) that I
have beene to my griefe, hithertoo interrupted to send you
answer.
<P 257>
   Though you therein mentioned severall things very serious and
weightee, and w=ch= might chall. some account, yet because I am
One with you in most of them, and conceiving yo=r= l=re= was
chiefly upon yo=r= greate Proposall (the Expresse Tearmes
whereof I shall retorne, viz=t= To agree (as is alreadie) to act
in dearest love expressed to him named Protector, (or Mount
Sirion as the Sidonians called Hermon, and David in the spirit
followed that faithfully, believingly, undoubtingly,
unanimously, that He would retreat in action of undertaking (and
soe witnes repentance by condisention) and wee would as
willingly repent of o=r= sinfull dissentions) I shall therefore
apply what I have now brought to offer, onely to that.
   You propose, That wee agree to act deerest Love, &c., yett
add, as is alreadie the meaning, whereof I do not fully
conceive, because itt seems to imply wee should noe that, w=ch=
is done already.
   You propose in generall to deale wisely, rationally, plainly,
&c., w=ch= from my hearte I desire to observe in whatever I
shall have to doe with him: but you doe not assigne anie thing
particularly wherein I shall soe deale.
   The ends you propose my hearte saith amen unto. That He may
retreat from the evill of His waies, and myselfe from myne, for
both or either of w=ch= I hope my Soule would blesse Jehovah,
and therefore be thanckfull for anie gracious helpe or mercies
in order thereunto. I can affirme I desire not a haire from anie
of their heads for anie unkindnes to mee, I could blesse them
y=t= curse and praie for my persecuto=rs= as they are myne. For
all the upright in hearte amongst them I daily aske mercy, as
for my owne soule, I confesse also, I have much cause to bee
ashamed for the best of my doeings, much more wherein manifold
infirmities have beene compassing, yett I must not deny the
grace and simplicity God hath given, to keepe the word of his
<P 258>
patience in this daie, though in a weake measure, I maie also
tell you my feares (for w=ch= I have manie grounds, where upon I
conceive) that some have com~itted as sore Trespasse as anie
mentioned in the Holy Scriptures from Caine to Judas. That
adoreing hearte hath soe turned aside, they cannot saie, Is
there not a lye in my right hand, Isi. 44. 20. They have chosen
their owne waies, and I think, Isi. 66. 3. 45., is very
applicatory to them. Soe. 2, Thes. 2. 11. I thinke they have
forsaken the Lord, theire Defence is departed, yea is turned to
be theire Enemy w=ch= waie soever they turned. Though they cry
He heares not, though his hand be lifted they see not. But
whilst this Distresse is upon them they trespasse yett more. 2
Cron. 28. 22. What you have to write, or (if the Lord soe
please) to speake to mee in this matter (because Captaine Taylor
hath hinted a little hope of seeing you) I begg an equall mind,
open deare and hearte unto, and therein variousely begg the
helpe of yo=r= praires. I have much cause to acknowlidge yo=r=
tender love and respects manie waies, in thanckfull remembrance
whereof I remaine
   Yo=rs= much engaged, and firmly endeared in the Lord,
   T. Harrison.

<Q JON 1658 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 260>
[^JOHN JONES TO PETER STERRY^]
To Mr. Storry.
Deare and Hon=d= in the Lord Jesus,
   It was my happinesse (when I dwelt at Whitehall and was an
unworthy member of that greate Councell) to have
<P 261>
some glymps of the Spirituall frame of yo=r= Soule and of those
excellent truthes and precious Mysteries of the Gospell which
you then held forth, and although the ffleshly temper of my
heart, and the little light which I then or yet attained in the
true and saveing knowledg of them would not admitt mee to
retaine much of what I then heard from you (because my spiritual
understanding was darke and lowe to apprehend, and my heart not
filled to receive the impression of what you then delivered in
many sermons) yet my desires have been very much to have those
truthes renewed unto mee, and to have seene those labou=rs= of
yo=rs= published in print, especially those Sermons you preached
on Phill. 1, 21; and since the Lord hath bene pleased to take
from me my precious yoake fellow and faithfull helper in the
things of God, and to leave me heere, as it were, alone in a
Land where the terrible Judgm=ts= hooave to and froe, devouring
the Inhabitants, and where most of those that possesse the feare
of the Lord are either engaged in publiqe and pulpit contenc~ons
about outward Administrac~ons, especially those about Infant and
adult washings, or carried out into a verball possession of the
Bare name, and denying the power of Godlinesse, circumscribing
God, Christ, Heaven, Hell and other objects of faith within
themselves to be God and Christ, and therefore hould themselves
not capable of sinning, and consequently noe acc~on of theirs to
be sinne. That prayer is impertinent and needlesse, that were to
acknowledg God without them, and because where there is noe
sinne there is noe lawe, and where there is noe transgression.
And thus endeavouring to build up a fearfull spirituall Babell
instead of the service and worshipp of God by mysterious and
unintelligible expressions. I have beene much heightened in
those my desires for y=e= better establishing my owne heart in
these shakeing times, and therefore have at this time taken upon
mee the freedome to direct these lynes unto you, 
<P 262>
therein to expresse those my former and p=r=sent desires, and
likewise my hope that you will not be wanting in the greater
duety you owe the Lord Jesus of publishing what hee hath
revealed unto you of those hydden mysteryes unto those y=t= want
y=e= light and (like a man in a dreame) may bee apt to be lifted
up (as hee thinkes into heaven) into fires of contenc~ons or
darke clouds of notions, unto which when the least beame from
the Sonne of Righteousnesse approacheth, the poore Creature's
chariott of vapours and smoke dispenseth, and himselfe, frighted
w=th= the fearfull fall, awaketh and findeth himselfe in the
lowest and darkest posture of man. I looke upon you as one of
y=e= most proper and effectual Instrum=ts= in y=e= Lord's hand,
to convey that light and life y=t= may awaken and warne poore
creatures in such condic~on, and thereby rescue them from the
subtile snares of Sathan, which is the reason why I have given
you this trouble, and am raised to this confidence y=t= you will
regard w=t= is here written, although from one who is very
little, if at all, knowne unto you; and if, in y=e= mean time,
you would aford me something of yo=r= thoughts touching y=e=
before menc~oned perticulars which trouble and distract y=e=
church of Christ heere, I wuld esteem it a speciall favour from
the Lord, and much of Christian freindshipp from you.
   Yo=r= affec~ionat freind,
Really to serve you in the ways and Bowells of Christ,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 29th Sept., 1658.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 262>
[^JOHN JONES TO CHARLES FLEETWOOD^]
To his Ex=cie= the Lord ffleetwood.
May it please yo=r= Ex=cie=
   Lieu=t= Gen=ll= Ludlowe, upon his goeing away from hence,
which was on Tuesday, the 18=th= p'sent, left his com~and in
Chieffe of the fforces heere in my manadgem=t= haveing, as he
<P 263>
alledges, yo=r= Ex=cies= approbation for his soe doing. I
confesse I did judge myselfe extreme unfitt for soe greate a
Trust; butt all y=e= Officers here (\(Nemine Contradicente)\)
when propounded to them gave their full Consent and Concurrance
to it, without w=ch= I had been very loath to have undergone the
Burthen of it, though intended but for a few dayes. The very
nexte day after (w=ch= was on a Wednesday) we had some Rumo=r=
of y=e= late unexpected change, and on Thursday, by the Packett,
a full Relatio~ by private l=res= It was very astonishing unto
us (in regard for many weekes before wee had received noe l=re=
by reason of contrary Winde) w=ch= informed us of any tendency
of Councells towards such a perriod; upon y=e= first intimation
thereof, I called all the Officers together, and disposed them
to their several Chardges to prevent any practice of y=e= Com~on
Enemy upon us. I find them all as yet willing to acquiesse in
y=e= acting of y=e= Lord's Providence, although mixed w=th=
sorrow y=t= y=e= Lords seeme to procrastinate o=r= hopes of a
firme settlem=t= of peace to o=r= Nation, and w=th= feare of
w=t= y=e= issue of this Dispensation wilbe. But wee are not
w=th=out some measure of faith and hope that y=e= Lord will make
good his promise to his people that all things will worke
together for their good. For my owne parte, I have very stronge
confidence y=t= yo=r= Lo=pp= will find all things in an honest,
quiett posture here, waiting for the pleasure of the Lord
concerning us, and for a speedie Establishm=t= of Power for
administration of Justice and government. Men's Intereste and
publique Revenue being almost pure Confusion for want thereof.
Wee hope you will speedilie returne o=r= Com~ander in chieff
unto us, his satisfacc~on in w=t= is past will contribute much
to y=e= perfect settling of y=e= mindes of many to an
acquiessence therein.
   This day wee, the Comand=rs= and Offic=rs= of y=e= army,
keepe together to seeke y=e= Lord for councell and guidance to
o=r=
<P 264>
ffreinds in England, y=t= you may be lead by his blessed Spirit
(and not your owne) to bring forth things as eminently gloriouse
in holinesse and justice as yo=r= late actings have been
eminently strange and unparalleled. The Lord seemes to promise
some such fruict, in y=t= he preventetd y=e= shedding of one
dropp of blood, whereas other Nations have been Rolled in blood
upon farr lesse occasion. The Lord preserve you and all y=t= are
faithfull to his Interest from y=e= malice and power of men. My
wife continues ill of her late distemper.
   Yo=r= Ex=cies= most humble Serva=t=
   J. Jones.
Dublin, 22=d= 8=m= 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 266>
[^JOHN JONES TO EDMUND LUDLOW^]
To his Ex=cie= L=t= Gen=ll= Ludlowe Com~ander in Chiefe of y=e=
forces in Ireland
S=r=
   The Representation of the Gen=ll= Councell of Offic=rs= of
y=e= army in England directed to yo=r=selfe to be com~unicated
to the Officers here and w=ch= yo=e= were pleased to inclose in
yo=r= l=re= to me by Colonell Barrow. I have communicated to the
councell of yo=r= officers who in reality I thinke I may truely
say every one of them had a very deepe and sadd sense of y=t=
extraordinary action rep=e=sented unto them!
<P 267>
They thought it adviseable to send copies of that representation
and of those other papers produced by Collonell Barrowe to y=e=
severall Garrisons and quarters of yo=r= army to prevent
misunderstanding w=th= strict injunction to bee watchfull to
p'serve the publique Peace and to mayntaine love and union
amongst us. We had recieved notice of y=t= action by private
l=res= three dayes before Coll=l= Barrowes arrivall upon w=ch=
there was a day kept to seeke the Lord in y=e= Councell Chamber
by the Com=rs= and Officers, and all Offic=rs= com~anded
forthw=th= to repayre to their respective Chardges for y=e=
service above menc~oned, and not to be absent thence w=th=out
special order. I have given ord=r= to Mr. Goodwine to send yo=u=
copies of as many of the said papers as may be of use unto you
or worth yo=r= perusall. The councell of yo=r= officers here
have thought it fitt to returne to y=e= Lord Gen=ll= ffletewood
and his Gen=ll= Councell of Offic=rs= from whom y=e= s=d=
rep=e=sentation came somew=t= of their aprehensions touching
y=e= matter communicated unto them, and of what is upon their
Spirite to promote in such a day as this w=ch= they have
expressed in the inclosed paper, and com~anded me to convey the
same to yo=r= Ex=cies= hand w=th= a signification of their
humble desire that you wilbe pleased to close and p'sent it
according to the superscription. They have likewise appointed
Lieu=t= Coll: Isaack Dobson to waite on yo=r= Ex=cie= and
negotiate the concernem=t= of this army, but have not thought
fitt to give him any instructions in writing, judgeing it fitter
he should receive directions from yo=r=selfe in w=t=ever is
proper for him to appeare in or insist upon in y=e= behalf of
this army, And when you shall judge his negotiation there may be
of lesse use then his service here, It is desired he may returne
to his chardge. The bearer Coll. Barrow wilbe ready to waite on
you in y=e= delivery of the l=tre= if you judge it convenient.
   Yo=r= Ex=cies= most humble servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin, 27=th= October, 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 268>
[^JOHN JONES TO CHARLES FLEETWOOD^]
To his Ex=cie= the Lord Gen=ll= ffleetwoode.
May it please yo=r= Ex=cie=.
   My hon=ble= friend Coll. Barrow being here upon the place can
give yo=r= Ex=cie= a better accompte of affayres here then I can
by l'=res=. I hope yo=r= fforces here will be found in a very
good disposition to preserve the publique peace, and love and
union w=th= the armyes of England and Scotland, and that they
will not be discomposed by any practice y=t= may be attempted
upon them to y=e= contrary. The Lord Chancell=r= Steele is under
some indisposition to health, w=ch= necessitates my constant
attendance att the Councell Board, and therefore I humbly desire
y=t= o=r= Lieu=t= Gen=ll= may be hastened unto us to beare his
share of the burthen, and qualified w=th= power as Com=r=. There
was this last weeke a Horrid Murther com~itted neare Ardmagh,
upon (as they say) a Godly Englishman, who came lately into that
countrey to plant. He was killed in his bedd, and his wife by
him received 8 wounds, and thought by the villanes to have beene
killed. There were tenne of them; three taken by track and
pursuit of the neighbo=rs=, but noe Power in Ireland to doe
justice upon them (as my long Robe assotiates tell mee. It is
well Phineas, his companion, were not of that profession), nor
to force them to impeach the other seaven. There is a clause in
our Power requireing us to cause justice to be admistred, w=ch=
is judged of noe force w=th=out other com~issions, or more
articulat direction. Robberyes are frequently com~itted on y=e=
English, and noe Power to make reparation to y=em= upon the
Irish as was accustomed formerly is necessary to be put in
execution now. There is noe Power here (as they say) to compell
one man to right another by paying him his due, as to y=t= we
are in p'fect confusion, and it is a wonder if violence and
fforce be not used by the people to right themselves, and wee
drive them to it, for noe publique Revenue is paid but as it is
assigned to souldiers, and y=e= poore men
<P 269>
y=t= are to pay it, must have the souldiers helpe to compell
their creditors to pay them, and thus you see w=t= kind of
Courtes of Justice are like (through the cautionary prudence of
Hon=rble= ffreinds in England), to grow up amongst us. I beseech
yo=r= Ex=cie= let there be power placed somewhere to p=r=vent
these greate unparalled misscheifes, and p=r=don y=e= boldness
of yo=r= Ex=cies= most humble and faithfull servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin, 28th October, 1659.

<Q JON 1659? JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 269>
[^JOHN JONES TO CHARLES FLEETWOOD^]
To his Ex=cie= Lord Gen=ll= ffleetewood.
My Lord,
   At my comming away from Whitehall the Councell were pleased
at yo=r= Lo=pps= motion to grannt me +L500 out of the Treasury
of the army for my advance, but injoyned me to repay it to y=e=
Treasury here in Ireland. Truely the charge of my journey and
preparation was soe greate y=t= I had not +L20 of y=t= money
left when I came to Holyhead, soe y=t= if y=e= pleasure of the
Councell bee such y=t= it must now be paid unto y=e= Treasury, I
have not wherewith to support myselfe here, where my expenses
are unavoidably more then some of my Brotheren. This is noe
place to borrow, and truely my wholl Estate in England is
settled [^scttled IN EDITION^] for paym=t= of my debtes, being
upwards of +L2000, and afterwards upon my son, w=th= power of
revocation (after paym=t= of my debts) by advise of my Trustees,
and not otherwise, whereof I made bold to name yo=r= Ex=cie= as
one of them, soe y=t= I am in an incapacity to raise money for
my p=r=sent maynteynance; in this station my humble request is
(if yo=r= Ex=cie= judge it fitt) that if the said +L500 be not
allowed me towards my chardges
<P 270>
in repayreing hither, the repaym=t= thereof may be respited
untill I am called away hence, w=ch= I humbly leave to yo=r=
Ex=cies= wisdome to determine, and rest
   Yo=r= Ex=cies= most humble servant,
   J. Jones.
My wife is through mercy in a good measure recovered of her late
distempers, w=ch= was y=t= w=ch= she had for these 3 yeares. It
wilbe an occasion of much rejoyceing to us to heare often y=t=
y=e= Lord deales kindly w=th= y=r= Lo=pp= and yo=r= deare Lady,
and sweete Branches in respect to health.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 270>
[^JOHN JONES TO ROBERT BARROW^]
To my Hon=ble= Friend Coll Robert Barrowe.
Deare freind.
   As many officers as were about y=e= Towne this morning mett
to advise w=t= is fitt to be done upon y=e= papers w=ch= Mr.
Payne brought over to be subscribed. I finde them all in a very
good, honest frame of spirit, very willing and ready to act
anything y=t= may mayntayne and strengthen union and love
between them and y=e= army of England, and shall be warranted by
y=e= rule of prudence and christianity. Some difficulty lay upon
them in regard y=e= declaration of y=e= Army of England in
relation to a future settlem=t=, (and y=e= insisting upon some
reall good things to be established to y=e= Nations, w=ch= may
make y=e= people happier in their Civill and Spirituall
concernements, then the late Powers have hitherto rendred them),
is not come forth for want of a thorough assurance thereof. His
Ex=cie= the Lord Generall ffleetewoode made some demurre (as we
have beene informed) of accepting the Gen=ll=ship untill he
should bee satisfied of
<P 271>
their full purpose therein, and how farre he recieved
satisfaction in y=t= matter doeth not appeare here. Another
consideration lay before them, w=ch= was y=e= private state of
this army, many officers discharged of their commands w=th=out a
court marshiall, and very many more expecting y=e= like measure;
and how to p=r=vent these persons appeareing w=th= their
commands, and attempting a discomposure amongst the fforces, is
matter of seriouse advise. In the close they appointed a further
debate of this matter to be on this day seaven-night, and in the
meanetyme every man in his respective station promise to
consider how w=th= full unanimity it may bee carried on, and to
endeavour to remove scruples where they meete w=th= them,
hopeing likewise y=t= by that time the said declaration may come
over, and y=t= it will bee soe comp=r=hensive of good things,
and soe suitable to y=t= spirit of an army of ffreeborne
Englishmen and Gospell professo=rs=, that it will give
universall satisfaction. I desire you to give L=t= Gen=ll=
Ludlow this accompte, and likewise to his Ex=cie= and to others
as you shall receive directions from him.
   Yo=r= affecc~onate ffriend and servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin, 30th October, 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 271>
[^JOHN JONES TO GEORGE MONCK^]
To Generall George Moncke, att Edinborrough, in Scotland.
S=r=
   Your letters and papers by y=e= bearer to L=t= Gen=ll=
Ludlowe coming to my hands, who am appointed to Command here in
Chieffe in his absence, I have opened, and finding them to be of
publique concernm=t= wherein you desire advise and councell, I
have impairted them to the ffield Officers here, who have had
longe acquaintance w=th= you, and a high esteem of yo=r=
merritt, ffrom whom you are to expect very
<P 272>
speedily some account concerning what you are pleased to menc~on
in yo=r= said letters, whereof I thought fitt to give you this
intimation by your owne messenger, and remayne
   Sir, yo=r= humble servant,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin, 4th November, 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 274>
[^JOHN JONES TO JOHN BARRETT^]
To Majo=r= John Barrett.
S=r=
   The Councell of Officers here have thought fitt to make
choice of you to go as an Expresse from them to Gen=ll= Moncke.
They have caused copies to bee sent you of y=e= Dispach w=ch= is
to goe w=th= you, and of such other papers as are come over to
us w=ch= may informe yo=u= of y=e= state of matter of ffact
concerneing the transactions of those affaires menc~ioned in
y=e= papers. That you may be y=e= better able to informe o=r=
ffriends in Scotland of the grounds and reasons of these
extraordinary Actings, and dispose them to a peaceable frame of
spirit, wherein yo=r= ffriends here are confident y=t= the Lord
will make you an useful Instrument. They doe not Conceive y=t=
any particular Instructions are needfull for you yo=r= worke
being onely to indeavoure the undeceiveing of o=r= ffriends and
p'vent Breaches betweene them and their Brotheren, who have been
soe many years ingaged in one Com~on Cause and must stand or
fall together. It is desired likewise y=t= you will settle a
course of intelligence betweene o=r= ffriends in Scotland and
us, and in y=e= meane tyme of yo=r= returne y=t= yo=u=
Com~unicate unto us the State of Affaires so farre as they come
to yo=r= Knowledge. If you find an opportunity to take up fifty
pownds for y=e= beareing of yo=r= Chardge in that Expedition,
and Chardge it upon y=e= Treasury in Ulster or att Dublin, care
wilbe taken y=t= it be made good unto yo=u= w=ch= being all I
have att p'sent to Trouble you I remayne,
   Yo=r= assured ffriende to serve you,
   Jo. Jones.
Dublin 4=th= November 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 275>
[^JOHN JONES TO DANIEL AXTEL^]
To my honored ffriend Co=ll= Daniel Axtell to be com~unicated
unto Co=ll= Robert Barrowe.
Deare friend,
   I am exceedingly obliged unto you for yo=r= very punctuall
Intelligence of Affaires, all my other ffriends except honest
Vernon, being silent and myself forgotten of them. Yo=r= letter
this weeke gave the most Articulate and Satisfactory Account of
any. The Armyes Declaration hath but a mixed operation amongest
us, it is conceived by sober men that the Clawse of Repeale
might have been better worded, and a Legislative Expression
forborne, and yet the purpose obtained more effectually by
shewing the Lawe declared ag=t= to be destructive to y=e= Navy
our Bullworke ag=t= forreigne Nations, to the Army o=r= Strenght
and Security ag=t= o=r= home and comon Enemy, to the people in
opening a doore for free Q=rs= and sword powere imediately to
returne upon them, and y=t= by necessity the highest and most
indispensible Lawe, The Clawse Concerneing Tythes conceived not
seasonably inserted, nor thorroughly satisfactory to any. The
Good things expected to be insisted upon by them as peculiar
blessings to these Nations not att all particularly menc~oned,
but wrapped in Gen=lls= These things I menc~on as the sense of
others, that a publication of a more thorough satisfaction may
be hastened. Wee are here inquireing and listening after things
and substances, and haveing them we can dispence w=th= fformes
and fframes (y=e= best and most righteous of w=ch= will in a
short tyme decay, and decline from their primitive lustre) (as
is experienced in this day) but righteousnesse itselfe and
holyness itselfe will never decay, although it may sometimes bee
hid as it were under a Cloud of Tyrannouse and oppressive
powere. The Officers here conceived fitt that the papers which
passed from them to England and Scotland should be printed for
y=e= Information o=r= ffriends in y=e= remote parte of this
Land, copies
<P 276>
whereof I have sent yo=u= inclosed. The fayleings y=t= are in
them I must acknowledge as mine ymediately, but mediately as
theirs who sett me on worke.
   Colonell Cooper is now going to y=e= North to Com~and in
those parts, the Lord be his wisdome and strength. The papers
for subscriptions were by concent of the Officers presently sent
abroade, some Spirits are unquiett, they are mostly such as were
unsatisfied att the abolition of the Governem=t= by a single
p'son and recalling of the longe Parliament. The Cavelleeres of
all sort are of this temper, and now much raised in their
Spirite and hope for Good newes for their King from Scottland,
which makes me feare y=t= poore Moncke is Trepanned, for if he
ownes the Interest he will surely be destroyed, wee shall
indeavor as the Lord shall inable us to p'serve the peace heare,
our fforces are very scant considering y=e= temper of Ulster and
Munster, I pray begge my pardon of my Lord ffleetwood and o=r=
L=t= Gen=ll= Ludlow y=t= I cannot write unto them. Wee shall be
observant of their Com~ands, and be pleased to acquainte them
w=th= soe much of the contents hereof as yo=u= judge fitt for
thier cognizance or p'usall, remember y=t= wee want power to
putt Lawes in execution for p'servation of y=e= peace, punishing
Murtherers, distributeing Justice, Relieving dispoyled English,
and noe man layeth our condic~on to heart, Ireland quite
forgotten in the proclamation sett out by the Com=tee= of
safety.
   Yo=r= most affectionate friend really to serve yo=w=,
   Jo. Jones.
   My deare love to Vernan w=th= thankes for his remembrance of
mee.
Dublin, 8d. 9m., 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 277>
[^JOHN JONES TO ROBERT BARROW^]
To Co=ll= Robert Barrow, w=th= an inclosed.
S=r=
   I have noe tyme to inlarge. The inclosed in short is o=r=
Condition, and questionlesse its sadd. Com~unicate it as yo=w=
see Cawse. It is w=th=out question y=t= Ch. S=t= his Interest is
endeav=r=d to be sett up here, and believed y=t= the same will
be advanced in Scottland, for the Cavailleer Spirit is y=e=
lively Spirit, and they carry it as if a day of greate
redemption to them drew neigh. If y=e= Lord were not of o=r=
side, may we now say we should be suddainely destroyed by them.
Get an ymediate Ord=r= to recruit these fforces, that wee may
not be found neglecting the meanes. Wee have noe exact
Intelligence how Affaires goe in England, nor what to declare
for if there were need. Wee are undone for want of Power to
administer Justice.

A copie of M=r= Waring's Intelligence.
[^INTELLIGENCE OMITTED^]
<P 278>
S=r=
   This intelligence comes from a good hand, compare y=t= you
have from abroad. If the truth of this can be made out, there
might be good use made of it in makeing it publique, to
undeceive our English friends who are ready to bring ruine upon
themselves, by being fooled into an ingagem=t= for the
restoreing of the Long Parliament, not as it last mett, for some
of the most ingenious of them confesse they were not satisfyed
in their authority, since y=e= exclusion of y=e= major p~te of
their members and y=e= House of Lords, soe y=t= it is very
evident y=t= Ch. S=t.= is intended by the designers to be
brought under y=e= covert of y=e= Longe Parliam=t= for there are
noe greater friends to a single Governm=t= then the excluded
members of both Houses. I doe not find one man opening his mouth
for restoreing y=e= Long Parliam=t= as they last mett.

Excuse me both our Gen=lls.= My hands are full. The inclosed
gives y=em= y=e= state of things here.

S=r=
   This day is very gloomy w=th= us, and seemes to portend a
very sad tyme approaching from Carrigfergus. It intimated that
newes is come to them by a Scottish merchant y=t= Major Crisp
hath secured one Markes Eyre for Monck, and y=t= Coll. Sawry and
his Lieut. Coll. are fledd. The High Sherriefe of the Queenes
County hath chardged the collectors of y=e= assessm=ts= at their
p~ill not to collect them, The like is done in Ulster, and it's
conceived there wilbe a gen=ll= defection by the inhabitants.
The forces in y=e= worst posture imaginable, very many Troopes
and Companyes their Officers unfixed, and being in expectation
to be
<P 279>
casheered, are very much incensed and yet continue in y=e= head
of their com~ands, and this is the condition of some of yo=r=
chief Guarrissons, all the fforces soe placed in Guarrissons and
Plantations that we cannot draw out 500 horse and 1000 foote in
any one place in Ireland without indangering y=e= ruine of y=e=
Quarters from whence they should be drawen out. Some designe
supposed to be on foot for the restoreing of some friends to
com~and y=t= w=ch= I dare not ment~on w=h=out further light.
Private meetings give cause of suspition. W=th=out wee bee in
such a condicion of security as to be able to draw together into
Ulster 500 horse and 1000 foote, and the like number into
Munster, and as many in the head Quarters w=th=out hazarding
o=r= Guarrisons, we cannot have any confidence in o=r= outward
strength. It is good we have a good God to trust to. I think it
were adviseable y=t= Ord=ces= should be sent hither for y=e=
recruiting of y=e= Troopes to 70, and the Companyes to 100, and
y=t= some course be taken to pay them till this calamitouse
hower is over. The Lord be yo=r= wisedome and strength, that
o=r= Land may have cawse to rejoyce in you.
   Yo=r= humble servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin, 15=th= Nov., 1659.
Wee are here undone for want of Power to Administer Justice and
noe man layeth o=r= condic~on to heart.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 279>
[^JOHN JONES TO THOMAS(?) SCOTT^]
To Lieu=t= Colonell Scott.
Worthy Sir,
   I have according to yo=r= request sent you the inclosed, and
heartily wish y=t= the Lord may Guide yo=u= in yo=r= way and
Resolutions; The dissatisfaction yo=u= had (when I sawe yo=u=
last) touching the Legallity of y=t= Power then discoursed
<P 280>
of, or compleatnesse thereof as then it acted, makes me somew=t=
to doubte w=t= yo=u= meane by restoreing y=e= p'sent Parliam=t=
to their just Rights & Priviledges. Whether to y=e= same
condic~on they were in when they were last interrupted in
October, or to the compleatnesse of three Estates, according to
y=e= auncient usadge & Custome of England, I cannot believe you
intend y=t= wherein yo=u= had noe satisfaction. And I am
confident yo=u= are very sensible that the attempting of the
other will bring ruine and desolation upon us, & the Cawse in
w=ch= wee have been engaged soe many yeares, and y=t= free
Parliam=ts= & restoreing of them y=t= is but a faire umbridge
devised by the common Enemy to disguise a wicked designe to
bring in Ch: S=t.= and soe I Cannot beleeve yo=u= intend y=t=
neither, and untill I am better informed I Cannot answer y=t=
part of yo=r= l'=re=. As touching the com~aund yo=u= mention I
have not taken upon me to alter any, but leave them as I found
them disposed by him whose place I now supply. Beare w=th= my
hast, & esteeme mee
   Yo=r= assured friend to serve you,
   J. Jones.
Dublin, 17=th= Nov., 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 280>
[^JOHN JONES TO EDMUND LUDLOW^]
To his Excellencie L=t= Gen=ll= Ludlowe.
Deare S=r,=
   I have not much businesse to give yo=u= an acc=t= of from
hence. The last night I sent out Summons to all y=e= Coll=s= and
Capt=s= of Troopes & Companyes in Ireland to meete w=th= y=e=
Officers of y=eir= respective Regiments to Chose Members for
y=e= Gen=ll= Councell, menc~oned in y=e= third Article of the
Agreem=t.= Wee could not proceede sooner in this Election,
because y=e= Agreem=t= Came not to us untill Saturday y=e=
26=th,= late at night, by M=r= Payne the Messenger. There be
many symptoms of an Unquiet Spirit indeavouring
<P 281>
to bring us into trouble. Ardres Treav=r= and many others
(amonge whom D=r= George was) had their Meetings in y=e= North
from Howse to Howse, beginning at Hillsborow for about 14 dayes,
Scottish Papers industriousely scattered. Such of o=r= Army as
were formerly Cavalleeres or new Royallistes, and were
positively ag=t= y=e= restoreing of y=e= longe Parliam=t,= &
would have hindered it if they Cold runne much into y=t= fframe
of Spirit for dividing of us, and setting us in opposition to
y=e= Army in England, under y=e= Notion of being for a
Parliam=t= the sence whereof & y=e= Scope of y=e= Designe is in
all probability but y=e= same y=t= S=r= George Booth & his
confederats indeavour to Carry on, w=ch= although Crushed in
England is kept intyre in Ireland, wayteing for an opportunity
by reason y=t= none of the Instrum=ts= w=ch= probabley were to
Carry it on have beene incapacitated or Cleereley discovered.
S=r= Since the perusall of yo=r= last l'=res= to me, & of
another to my Brother, I have been much troubled y=t= I should
be soe uncharitably Censured by you before I had admittance to
speake for my selfe. I thank God I have a faithfull Witnesse
w=th=in me, testifying that I am not much in love w=th= the
Hono=r= of my Implym=t= That I never sought it, That I gain
nothing by it, That I have hitherto indeavoured to dischardge
y=e= duty of y=e= place w=th= all faithfullnesse & Integrity,
and y=t= nothing moved me to accept this Burthen but a
willingnesse to appeare serviceable unto you. If I have fayled
in answering yo=r= Expectation It proceed not from
unfaithfullnesse or want of love, but from weakenesse & want of
discretion, wherein men of greater Reason and foresight than my
selfe may fayle. But really S=r= I am not Convinced wherein I am
Guilty of deserting the Parliam=t= who sent mee hither, & by
whose Authority I now Act, or of doeing of any Act tending to
the diminution of their Hono=r= or Authority. Am not I equally
concerned (allthough unworthy) w=th= any
<P 282>
Member of y=t= Councell in the Hono=r= & reputation thereof.
Whatever yo=u= are pleased to judge of me, I doe on yo=r=
behalfe blesse y=e= Lord y=t= yo=u= were freed from y=e= Snare
of such a Turne as this, although I know yo=u= would have
managed those affayres w=th= more Wisdome & better successe then
at p'sent they are, for by y=t= meanes you are freed from the
censures of other men, & in a capacity to helpe yo=r= ffriends.
As touching the l'=re= sent to Scotland it was mine only, as a
Serv=t= to y=e= Army, drawen by the direction of y=e= Officers
p'sent, and signed by them w=th= my selfe, and I cannot find
y=t= any thing in it disrespects y=e= Parliam=t,= or publique
safety w=ch= is above Parliam=ts,= that o=r= Armyes should
engage ag=t= one another in blood. It is the grand designe of
o=r= Com~on Enemy, & y=e= ready way to y=e= utter ruine of these
Three Nations, & of y=e= Interest of Christ in them, and to be
silent in such a Case was to be wickedly sinfull. The letter
pointed att any other as well as Moncke y=t= should attempt such
a design. It could not be for the Hono=r= or Interest of y=e=
Parliam=t= y=t= soe many Godly Officers should be taken from
their Comands, and imprisoned, &c. As touching the Subscriptions
I find yo=u= doe not understand how it was. The Papers Came
hither inclosed in l'=res= & directed to the respective Chiefe
Officers of each Regim=t= Att the first meeting of y=e= Officers
many were earnest to have their Packetts, But the Debate was
adjourned to y=t= day senight, to give way for o=r= attendance
on my L=d= Steele and Colonell Barrowe to y=e= Waterside. Att
the next meeting w=th=out any further Debate every Officer tooke
his owne Packett, conceiveing y=t= they ought not to bee kept
from, and y=t= it rested in their discretion what to doe w=th=
them, soe y=t= herein I was least Concerned of any. Yo=u= were
pleased to write unto mee when you were upon yo=r= way to
London, y=t= if those now in power would resolve to establish
honest righteouse things yo=u= would w=th= y=em,= if not yo=u=
would take
<P 283>
yo=r= Retirement. I have had noe other intimation from you w=ch=
might be an example for me to follow, w=ch= really I am inclined
in most things to doe. Truely S=r= I have by this tyme tyred my
self in writinge, & I am affrayed y=r= patience in reading w=t=
I have scribled betwixt sleeping & wakeing, being streightened
in Tyme, & full of the Sence of w=t= you have writt, that I
beleeve yo=u= will find little sence in this. I shall take leave
to close w=th= this Request, y=t= if you find me not to answer
yo=r= Expectation, or y=t= you thinke this Trust may be more
serviceable in another hand, be pleased freely to remove yo=r=
Com~and from me, and I shall indeavo=r= in any other Capacity as
well as in this wherein I now stand to approve my selfe really,
S=r,=
   Yo=r= most affectionat freind & faithfull servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin, 30=th= Novem., 1659.

S=r=
   I am advised by the Com=rs= Of y=e= Com~onwealth & the
Councell of Offic=rs= here to com~unicate unto you the enclosed
paper, being a copie of y=e= Agreem=t= of y=e= Gen=ll= Councell
of Offic=rs= of y=e= Armyes in England, &c., and from y=e=
Com=rs= sent from Gen=ll= Moncke and y=e= Gen=ll= Councell of
Offic=rs= in Scottland, w=ch= came to my hand but the last
night, and for the effectuall execution of y=e= third Article in
y=e= same. It is ordered that yo=r=selfe, and y=e= Com~ission
Offic=rs= of yo=r= Company (haveing a care to leave yo=r=
Garrison in a safe posture) be and appeare on the [{...{] day of
December next, att [{...{] and there joyne w=th= the rest of the
Com~ission Offic=rs= of your Regim=t= in
<P 284>
y=e= chusing of two Com~ission Offic=rs= for y=e= same Regim=t=
to to be Members of y=e= Gen=ll= Councell, mencioned in y=e=
s=d= third Article. Hereof you are not to faile.
   Yo=r= assured Friend,
   John Jones.
Dublin, 28th of Nov. 1659.
For y=e= tymes and places for each Regim=t= to meete, see a list
of y=e= matter conteying the names of y=e= Regim=ts= in
generall, and their tymes and places for y=t= service.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 284>
[^JOHN JONES TO THOMAS COOPER^]
To Coll. Thomas Lord Cooper.
S=r=
   I have, by the joynte Advise of y=e= Com=rs= of this
Com~onwealth and of as many Offic=rs= of y=e= Army as are in
Towne att p'sent, appointed severall places for the Com~ission
Officers of every respective Regim=t= or of as many of them as
can well be spared from their duty, to meete upon a Certaine day
likewise appointed, and being soe mett, to elect two Com~ission
Offic=rs= for every respective Regim=t= to be and appeare at a
Gen=l= Councell, to be holden att Whitehall, y=e= 6=th= of
December next, according to y=e= Tennor of y=e= Third Article in
y=e= inclosed paper. Y=e= tyme & place of meeting appointed for
y=e= Officers of yo=r= Regim=t= in order to y=e= said service,
is att Newry, upon y=e= 6=th= day of December next. I have, for
y=e= more effectuall and expeditiousse performance of this
Service (by y=e= s=d= advise), sent notice, by letters, unto
each Troope & Company in each Regim=t= in Irel=d= of y=e=
respective tymes, places and occasion of their meetings. The
managem=t= of y=e= Election, and y=e= returning of y=e= names of
y=e= p'sons w=ch= shalbe elected for yo=r= Regim=ts= to my
selfe, w=th= all possible speede, is left to yo=r= Care. It is
desired by such of o=r= ffriends as long for peace and
settlem=t=
<P 285>
upon y=e= foundac~ons of love, Trueth and Righteousnesse, y=t=
we should endeavo=r= to have such men elected as have y=e=
largest portion of a meeke, loveing, peaceable, healing spirit,
such as delight not to nourish or uphold a spirit of contenc~on
or by a law to impose their judgem=t= or practice in matters of
Religion in other men's conscienses. I am likewise to recomend
to yo=r= observation y=t= y=e= inclosed Agreem=t= doth not
require y=t= y=e= Officers to be chosen should be of every
respective Regim=t= for w=ch= they are Chosen; any Comission
Offic=r= of y=e= Army is capable to be elected, and conceived
adviseable, as well for expedition as avoiding unnecessary
Charge, y=t= as many of y=e= Officers of y=e= Army as are in
England, Capable of being elected, and fitly qualified, should
be chosen to serve in y=e= Councell - it being very probable
y=t= y=e= worke of y=e= Councell wilbe at an end before any from
hence can repayre thyther, And haveing to use his freedome in
debate and choise, and y=t= all o=r= endeavo=rs= may be att
those meetings to be united in freindship and mutall love
towards each other, w=th=out w=ch= we are not farr from ruine.
The Emissaryes of o=r= comon Enemy and his confederates being
att this instant very busy in all corners of y=e= Three Nations,
especially in this Land, in sending forth Libells and Seditiouse
papers to divide us amongst o=r=selves; But if y=e= Lord have
pleasure in us, he will defeat their councells, and bring them
to shame and Trouble who delight in Troubles and divisions.
   Yo=r= assured Freind to serve you,
   John Jones.
Dublin. 29=th= Nov., 59.
Post: I desire y=e= returne may be under y=e= hands of all y=e=
Offic=rs= consenting.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 286>
[^JOHN JONES TO ROGER BOYLE^]
To the Right Hon=ble= Roger L=d= Broghill.
S=r=
   The favo=r= of yo=r= Lo=pps= l'=re= of y=e= 25=th= instant I
received, and doe very much approve of yo=r= Lo=pps= Judgement
y=t= y=e= best seale to y=e= Agreem=t= wilbe the immediate
restoreing of y=e= Suspended Offic=rs= to their respective
commands, and untill y=t= be actually done, We may feare y=t=
some of o=r= ffreinds may be under Temptations, because those
y=t= have been ag=t= o=r= common Cause and Interest are very
much exalted in their hopes of y=e= issue of these Capitulations
and distances. The last Paquett brought us noe further acc=t= of
y=t= matter, but y=t= all things Continue quiett and receavable
in England. The L=d= ffleetewood sent over y=e= Agreem=t= w=th=
his Advise, that wee should proceed in y=e= election of members
for the Gen=ll= Councell of Offic=rs= w=ch= are to meete att
Whitehall, according to y=e= Tenn=r= of y=e= Third Article, but
Crosse Windes stayed the messenger at the Waterside till
Saturday last, Soe y=t= y=e= tyme of meeteing att Whitehall is
Come upon us before wee canne have any Regimental meetings of
o=r= Offic=rs=; neverthelesse I have sent l'=res= to all y=e=
Troopes & Companyes in every respective Regim=t= now in Ireland,
w=th= a copie of y=e= Agreem=t= and appointed y=e= respective
Tymes & places for their meetings. That in pursuance of y=e=
said Article they might proceed to elect, as y=e= inclosed
papers will more p'ticularly informe you. Your Lo=pps= Troope
being not Regimented, I have noething to direct me how their
suffrages should be taken - the Agreem=t= being silent therein -
whether this and others in y=e= same case be omitted by
inadvertency or of purpose I know not. Coll. Wallis, his
Regim=t= being the Horse, in yo=r= Quarters, are to meete at
Clonmell, on y=e= 7=th= of this moneth, Coll Zanbye's Regim=t=
meete at Cashell y=e= same. What yo=r= Lo=pp= Conceive fitt to
bee done in this Case I humbly submitt to yo=r= Wisdome. I am of
opinion y=t= y=e=
<P 287>
worke of y=e= Councell wilbe neither done or undone before any
can repayre thyther from Ireland. The nature of y=e= worke and
y=e= p'sent state of things will admitt of noe longe Debate or
divideings in Councell. If the Lord hath pleasure in us, he will
guide them in Councell, and make them Instrum=ts= to Establish
Justice and Righteousnesse in o=r= Land.
   I am, My Lord,
   Yo=r= affectionate and humble Ser=t=
   John Jones.
Dublin, 1=st= December, 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 287>
[^JOHN JONES TO CHARLES FLEETWOOD^]
To his Ex=cie= the L=d= Gen=ll= ffleetwood.
May it please yo=r= Ex=cie=
   I made boulde formerly to crave yo=r= Ex=cies= order for y=e=
withdrawing of Cap=t= Moulds Company from Beaumares there being
no neede of them there, and we extreamly want ffoote. I did
likewise mynd yo=r= Lo=pp= that y=e= new Recruits at Beaumares
are in a starveing Condition, & humbly desired y=t= Some Speedie
provition might be made for them, and I make bold now humbly
further to Crave That yo=r= Ex=cie= will be pleased to order a
Recruit of 100 Musketts for y=t= Garison, the 50 old Musketts
being delivered into yo=r= Stores, I cannot see how y=t= Garison
can be recruited, but from hence you may be pleased to signifie
yo=r= pleasure herein, & it wilbee readily obeyed.
   The publique afiaires here att p'sent in a quiet posture, but
very sad practises used to divide yo=r= fforces here whereof you
had full intimation by y=e= last, many honest men are fooled
into this designe, w=ch= hath its Roote & life in Ch: S=t.=
Interest, ffor the Polititians whose hopes are onely in o=r=
Armyes Divitions know y=t= Armyes once
<P 288>
thoroughly divided in termes of Opposition will never Cordially
unite, and y=t= Councells w=th=out fforce to justify them are
insignificant, drive on furiously to perswade freinds to an
opposition to y=e= English Army in ord=r= to y=e= restitution of
y=e= Parliam=t= but doe not declare w=t= Parliam=t= and therein
lyes a fallacy ffor y=e= best of those y=t= seeme thus zealouse
for a Parliam=t= were ag=t= y=e= restitution of y=e= longe
Parliam=t= to their last sitting. Wee have noe direction how to
deale w=th= men of unquiett Spiritte, & we are unwilling to use
Power w=th=out some positive direction, w=ch= we shall waite
for, I beseech y=r= Lo=pp= to conferre w=th= Lt. Gen=ll= Ludlowe
for y=e= restoreing of Lt. Coll. fflowere to some Command, hee
is a man y=t= will die att yo=r= ffeete, and utterly declines
associating w=th= any discontented p'ty. Bee pleased to afford
some signification of yo=r= pleasure concerning him. This is the
first day of the Election of Members in Ireland, yo=r= com~ands
fayling to come to us, tymely enough and because it is not
probable y=t= any Can Come from Ireland before the Councell
breake up, I beleeve most of o=r= Elections will fall upon o=r=
ffriends now in England. Those y=t= would rejoice in o=r=
Troubles give out That L=t= Gen=ll= and my L=d= Steele are
highly dissatisfied, that Gen=ll= Moncke utterly refuseth to
Confirme the Agreem=t= made by his Officers, That he calls a
Convention in Scotland, and raises very large Taxes, and Baggage
horses, & refuseth to restore y=e= Officers to their Com~and, &
many such like Reports, w=ch= make y=e= Cavallieres exceedingly
to rejoyce, being confident y=t= Ch: S=t.= his Interest cannot
bee prevented, there being noe other Interest intyre in y=e=
Three Nations, That y=e= Parliam=t= if it should be restored to
sitt againe will never agree w=th= this Army as now conducted,
and therefore either y=e= Army or Parliam=t= must be layd
asside. That if y=e= Army be layd aside, another Army must be
raised of other principles, and
<P 289>
those wilbee such as Countenanced S=r= George Booth's designe
(viz=t=) Cavalleeres under y=e= maske of a Presbiterian
Interest, such as would have the peace established on y=e=
Concessions at the Isle of Weight. These are y=e= hopes &
Expectations of y=e= Wicked. But o=r= Trust is in y=e= L=d= who
turnes y=e= Wisedome of men into folly. I beseech you by y=e=
next to remove as many of these reports as you find to be false,
by Com~anding some person to give a right State of things.
Whatsoever y=e= Lord directs you to doe, att yo=r= Generall
Councell doe it quickly, Delayes and longe Debates are
exceedingly dangerouse, if y=e= Spring overtake you before yo=u=
come to a Settlem=t= I cannot see how yo=u= will avoyd ruine
according to y=e= reasonings of man.
   Yo=r= Ex=cies= humble servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin, 6=th= December, 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 289>
[^JOHN JONES TO EDMUND LUDLOW^]
To his Ex=cie= L=t= Gen=ll= Ludlowe.
S=r=
   ffinding here one Mr. William Courtney, a Brother to o=r=
good friend Mr. Hugh Courtney, in a very low and necessitouse
condic~on, and also finding an Ensignes place voyd by meanes of
y=e= death of one of y=t= Capacity in Co=ll= Sanders Company,
soe returned on a muster taken since yo=r= Lo=pps= going over, I
have presumed to place this Mr. Courtney in y=t= imploym=t= and
to y=t= Company w=ch= I thought fitt to acquaint yo=u= w=th=
all, desireing y=t= if yo=r= Lo=pp= doe aprove thereof you will
please to send over (by y=e= next opportunity) yo=r= order
confirming the same, the younge man hath very good parts, and
hath behaved himselfe well since he came into this country,
w=ch= is about seaven yeares. I am not att rest in my spirit
until I have heard from yo=u= I am perswaded were yo=u= here you
would
<P 290>
doe noe otherwise than wee have done. Truely S=r= the scope of a
Designe is best understood (by them y=t= are not in it) by y=e=
persons y=t= Carry it on, of w=t= Principles they are and by
y=e= reports they give out, I shall not inlarge att this p'sent
upon this Theame, having given you y=e= like Trouble soe lately.
Send you yo=r= ord=r= in w=t= you would have done, and I doubte
not but you will recieve satisfaction from yo=r= Servants here,
I have written to my Lord ffleetwood, to intreate his Lo=pp= to
conferre w=th= yo=r= Ex=cie= about y=e= restoreing of L=t=
Co=ll= fflower to some Command. Hee is a man thoroughly
faithfull, and one y=t= doeth not att all Consort w=th= those
y=t= are malignantly affected. Unheard of crueltyes com~itted by
Torryes every night. The Irish Concieved in a greate readinesse
to rise. The Brittish in ffermanagh about Lesnabeaugh, were in
Armes last weeke, to y=e= number of 240 horse well mounted:
pretended in their owne defence ag=t= y=e= Irish, but suspected
upon some intimation from Scotland.
   There hath beene an indeavo=r= to disaffect every Troope &
Company in Ireland, under y=e= notion of giving Countenance to
Moncke. The Two Comp~ in Carregfergus mutinied, & were soe high
y=t= noething cold allay y=em= but fforce: Co=ll= Cooper & y=e=
Officers were faine w=th= their naked swords & pistells to
fforce them to their Quart=rs= I am loath to mention w=t=
acceptation y=t= disord=r= had amongst some persons here, who
are looked upon as freinds. I hope y=e= Lord wilbee p'esent
w=th= yo=u= att your great Councell, w=ch= meete this day, &
y=t= hee will direct yo=u= to a speedy settlem=t= ffor I am
cleare of this Judgem=t= that a breach in y=t= Councell, or a
longe delay in pointe of coming to a resolution, whereby y=e=
Spring may come upon us before a settlem=t= be declared, will
enevitably bring in Ch: S=t.= for thereby all Interest wilbee
broken but his, and his wilbee intyre in y=e= Three Nations, and
all Presbiterian and other Interests w=ch= can
<P 291>
consist w=th= y=t= Interest will joyne to it, and how large y=t=
wilbee is easily disccerned by y=e= Countenancers of S=r= G. B.
his designe, both in City & Countrey amongst Ministers, & all
other sorts of People. I have noe Tyme to inlarge although I am
very full of this apprehention.
   Yo=r= very reall & humble Servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin, 6 December, 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 291>
[^JOHN JONES TO HENRY CROMWELL^]
To the L=d= Henry Cromwell.
S=r=
   Mr. Wood being to waite upon yo=u= gives me y=e= opportunity
of acknowledging y=e= favo=r= of yo=r= lettere, and as to y=e=
contens of them soe farre as they relate to publique Interest,
It becomes me not to returne any Acc=t= thereof, in any other
way then by the Resolutions of y=e= Board, onely I begge leave
humbly to informe yo=r= Lo=pp= that I have inquired and cannot
finde why yo=r= Servants made any Complaynt y=t= they were
Threatened to be turned out of Cork Howse. The Title indeed hath
been a little debated upon some thoughts of useing y=e= Howse
for Com=rs= sitting as formerly and not for any Mans private
acom~odation. And it was then conceived y=t= if there were a
forraigne Tytle Claymed ag=t= the Common Wealthe many yeares
po=n= yo=r= Lo=pp= was most incompetent of any to purchase such
a Title in regard yo=u= were chiefely intrusted by y=e= Com~on
Wealth to mayntayne their Interest in Ireland, & came into
possession of y=t= Howse as belonging to y=e= Com~on Wealth &
under y=t= Trust. And likewise because about 2000=+L= was
disbursed out of y=e= publique Trer~y as we were informed upon
y=e= repayreing, inlargeing and fitting of y=t= Howse for
publique use and especially for yo=r= personall accom~odation as
being the Chiefe Magistrate, yet notw=th=standing that these and
other argum=ts=
<P 292>
for y=e= justifying of y=e= Com~on Wealths Right to the said
House were in consideration w=th= y=e= Com=rs=. They have not
soe much as inquired when yo=r= ffamilie was to remove thence,
but had a very tender & due Respect to yo=r= Lo=pp=, and really
this is all I know of y=t= matter.
   Wee have of late beene excersised under very unpleaseinge
dispensations, The confidence w=ch= men should have in each
other uppon acc=t= of Relation or friendship have beene soe
shaken, That instead of mutuall manifestations of love and
kindnesse, Jelousies & diffidences have too frequently been
fomented amongst ffriends by y=e= projections of such as sought
themselves more than y=e= com~on good, under w=ch= unhappie
influence I have beene for some yeares past, w=ch= deprived me
of much of y=t= sweetness & comfort w=ch= y=e= Lord in his Good
Providence towards me did seeme to promise by that Hon=ble=
Relation unto w=ch= I was admitted, The sence of w=ch= I hope
will ever ingage mee to strive for another frame of Spirit, And
as God shall administer an opportunity to endevo=r= to bee
serviceable unto those to whom I am related, & especially to
yo=r= Lo=pp= of whom (w=th=out flattery) I have a very greate
Esteeme and doe account it a duety incumbent upon me, and all
that professe y=e= name of Christ, to promote union, peace and
love betweene Relations, and to beare o=r= Witnesse against
divideing Principles & Practices amongst those that feare the
Lord. In the pursuite thereof I shall ever remayne,
   Yo=r= Lo=pps= most affectionate and most humble servant,
   Jo. Jones.
Decem. 10=th= 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 292>
[^JOHN JONES TO HARDRESS WALLER^]
To S=r= Hardres Waller, Kn=t= &c.
S=r=
   The sense I have of y=e= ruine and desolation w=ch= the
English Interest and people will inevitably be brought unto,
<P 293>
by that Rash action lately com~itted By those whom yo=u= have
com~issioned for y=t= end, Which tends to the Engageing of y=e=
English fforces in Ireland, one against another, The casting off
the English Governm=t= & Parliamentary Authority in this nation,
and by yo=r= assuming a Power of Legislature to Com~and the
fforces as Major Gen=ell= of y=e= Army, and to give Com~issions
for Com~ands to some, and deprive others of their Com~ands,
contrary to the Rules & discipline of Warr, (having never had
any Com~ission or authority for yo=r= soe doing) and by yo=r=
interrupting y=e= Com=rs= of Parliam=t= in y=e= manadgem=t= of
the Governm=t= & Interest of England in Ireland, by putting
fforce upon them, yo=e= doe indeavo=r= to make y=e= Governm=t=
of Ireland, distinct from y=t= of England, and thereby to start
a Warr betweene the Two Nations, and to deprive y=e= Army and
fforces of Ireland of their Reliefe, pay, and other immunityes
which they enjoy as being Englishmen & members of y=e= Army of
England, yo=u= doe likewise by this meanes shew an easy way for
Ch: St: to invade this Land, and by y=e= assistance of his
Irish, British, and other Confederats in Ireland, utterly to
destroy y=e= English Inhabitants, and make y=e= period of y=e=
English Interest in Ireland more bloody than the beginning of
the late horrid Rebellion, you returne y=e= Sould=rs= to ffree
billett & y=e= next step wilbee the taking of ffree quarter &
thereby yo=u= Act Contrary to y=e= known Law in y=t= Particular
(haveing noe necessity putt upon yo=u= for yo=r= soe doeing) By
w=ch= Practise yo=u= make y=e= poore Sould=rs= to bee hated by
the Inhabitants of y=e= Land, I say y=e= sad sense I have upon
my Spirit of the matters abovesaid. The respect I have to yo=r=
Person & family being exceeding desirous (if y=e= will of y=e=
Lord be soe) to be instrumentall in rescueing you from this
impending ruine w=ch= probably will reach you (although others
have a way to escape) if not speedily prevented, by offering
unto you a seasonable word of advice, and likewise y=e=
<P 294>
duety I conceive incumbent upon mee, as much as in mee lies, to
prevent the said Evills, by Exercising the Power put into my
hand for the Com~anding & ordering of the fforces in this Land,
hath inforced mee to give yo=u= this Trouble, and to require you
& I doe in y=e= name of the Parliament of the Com~onwealth of
England, (and by vertue of y=e= Power and authority to mee
dericted from the same) hereby require yo=u= imediately upon
receipt hereof to issue out Orders to require all the fforces of
Horse and ffoote, which are marched to this Towne, or are upon
their march, (w=th=out speciall ord=rs= from myselfe) imediately
to returne to their respective Quartr=rs= where they were
Ordered to quarter y=e= Tenth present, and thereto continue till
they receive further Ord=rs= from myselfe or from L=t= Gen=ll=
Ludlowe or from y=e= Com=rs= of Parliam=t= & that you cawse the
said Ord=rs= to be effectually put in Execution for y=e=
incouradgem=t= & p=e=servation of y=e= English Inhabitants, and
secureing the publique peace. And likewise you are hereby
required by vertue of the Authority aforesaid to cawse all
Persons not being members of y=e= Army, who have appeared in
Armes, to countenance or assist the surprisall of this castle,
to lay downe their Armes, & retourne to their respective
Habitations, upon payne of being declared Rebels against the
Com~on Wealth of England, To order all Offic=rs= both of Horse
and ffoote to retourne to their respective Com~ands, and y=t=
yo=u= doe imediately sett y=e= Com=rs= of y=e= Comon Wealth for
ye Goverment of this Land into a condition of liberty, whereby
they may p'forme the Trust reposed in them by the Parliam=t= All
w=ch= I require of yo=u= as yo=u= are y=e= Person y=t= takes
upon yo=u= y=e= Excersise of y=e= place of Majo=r= Gen=ell= as
yo=u= answere y=e= contrary att yo=r= uttmost Perill. Dated at
y=e= Castle of Dublin, this nineteenth day of December, 1659.
   J. Jones.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 295>
[^JOHN JONES TO MATTHEW THOMLINSON^]
To S=r= Mathew Tomlison. Knight, &c.
S=r=
   This disorder is like to produce very sadd Consequences. The
Troopes & Companyes are drawne out of their respective Quarters
& are marched & marching to this Towne upon promises of
receiving three monethes pay in hand, w=ch= is a thing
impossible to bee performed, and from whence will followe an
imediate ruine to y=e= English in their plantations, by the
Toryes, who will growe into such strength as will enable them to
justifie themselves, & open a new Warr upon y=e= English, and
thereby give an entrance to Ch: St: his Confederates. This will
likewise follow that y=e= Troopes coming up here and y=e=
incouradgem=t= promised being not made good unto them, They will
fall foule upon y=e= Citie or att least upon such as wilbee
represented unto them as Adversaryes, and I believe M=r=
Winter's congregation will not escape, To p=r=vent w=ch= I have
sent last night to S=r= Har: Waller to require him to Ord=r= all
y=e= Troopes and Compainyes to march to their respective
Quarters for y=e= defence of y=e= Countrey. To require all
persons in Armes not being members of y=e= Army to retourne to
their respective Habitations upon payne of being declared
enemyes to this Com~on Wealth, and thereby to make way for y=e=
Com=rs= of the Com~on Wealth to be att liberty and safety, for
y=e= exersising of y=e= Trust reposed in them, & to y=e= end
y=t= noe honest meanes for preventing the said Evills might bee
left unattempted, I humbly offer to consideration whether it be
adviseable to propound.
   That it be Agreed that all places of Strength now in the
hands of the Offic=rs= of y=e= Army bee continued in y=e= same
hands, untill y=e= pleasure of L=t= Gen=ell= Ludlowe o=r=
Com~ander in Chiefe be knowne concerning them; That the present
Com~and=r= in Chiefe upon y=e= Place doe act noething in
relation to his Com~and, but according to y=e= Advise of S=r=
Hardres
<P 296>
Waller, The Three Warrens, Coll. Lawrence, Coll. Cooper, or any
foure or more of them, untill the pleasure of L=t= Gen=ll=
Ludlowe bee knowne concerning the said com~and. That all the
Troopes and Companyes be returned to their Quarters in the
Countrey, To the end the former Evills may bee prevented, and
the Commissioners of Parliament may returne to their duty. But
the Com=rs= cannot act w=th= safety untill the fforces returne
to their Quarters; for the Sould=rs= if they bee in Towne will
mutiny and fall on them for the pay w=ch= their Officers have
promised them, and therefore let y=t= bee donne in the first
place, and if that bee not done soddainely, The sould=rs= will
take ffree quarter and Plund=r= &c. I conceive if these
proposalls bee made knowne to M=r= Winter and his people, they
wilbee earnest to promote them; But if they will refuse to stand
to the L=t= Gen=lls= Determination, there is more Evill in y=e=
Bottome of this Designe then is yet discovered. The most honest
and prudent way to proceed in these proposalls is first to
p'pound them to such as are reputed most honest amonge them, and
best fixed to the Cause and Interest wee are to may~tayne, as to
M=r= Winter and his people, and by them to Waller. The Lord
direct you what to doe, and keepe you from Snares.
   Yo=r= most affectionate and humble Servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin Castle, 20=th= 10=ber= 1659.

<Q JON 1659 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 296>
[^JOHN JONES TO HARDRESS WALLER^]
To S=r= Hardres Waller, Knight, &c.
S=r=
   There came to my hand this day a printed Paper, intituled a
Coppie of a l'=tre= from Gen=rll= Moncke, bearing date y=e= 11th
day of November last, importing an answere to a letter sent
<P 297>
from me, yo=r= selfe, and others, to him, beareing date y=e= 4th
of November. If such a l'=tre= came from him, It was not
advisedly donne to conceale it soe longe, if agreement betweene
the Parliament and their Army bee the thinge wee ayme att; for I
judge the substance of y=e= l'=tre= to bee both in matter &
language, soe honest & sober, & soe full of Christian
Expressions of faithfullnesse & integrity to the Cause &
Interest we have beene ingaged in during all y=e= tyme of the
late Troubles in these Three Nations, That I doe very freely
agree w=th= the desire in y=e= Close thereof (vizt), That wee
here should joyne w=th= him & the fforces in Scotland in o=r=
desires to y=e= Army in England that this Parliam=t= may be
restored, and put a legall Period to their sitting, and settle
such Expedients as may bee for the secureing of these Nations
against the Comon Enemy; and had y=e= letter come to my hand
when I was in a capacity to have propounded it to the officers
here, I had done it w=th= as much ffreedome as any that pretend
to more zeale in that matter; and if yet I may bee any way
instrumentall to promote y=t= meanes of accommodation, I doe
hereby declare unto you y=t= I am ready to use my endeavo=rs= in
such way as may bee judged most effectuall. Had this or the
originall come to my hand sooner, I had sooner tendered my
services herein, which I leave to yo=r= consideration, and rest
   S=r= y=r= humble servant,
   John Jones.
Dublin Castle, the 22=d= of December, 1659.

<Q JON 1660 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 297>
[^JOHN JONES TO RICHARD CROMWELL^]
To the Right Hon=ble= the L=d= Richard Cromwell.
S=r=
   M=r= Waterhouse informes me y=t= yo=r= Lo=pp= have been
pleased to interdict the Paym=t= of the Annuity w=ch= his late
<P 298>
Highnes yo=r= father settled upon my wife untill you should
signifie yo=r= further pleasure therein. I believe it is not
unknowne to yo=r= Lo=pp= upon what consideration the Interest to
y=t= Anuity came unto mee. I was ingaged by agreem=t= before
marriage to settle upon her 300=li= p~ ann. Joynture w=ch= I
have done. The anuity abovemenc~oned, his late Highnes assured
mee he had settled upon her dureing her life, besides some other
Emolum=ts= which I had intimation of I should have, but came
short of, occasioned probably by my own indiscretion. Truely
S=r= I thought there was not in y=e= Worlde better security for
120=li= p~ ann. dureing an ancient life then his Worde and Deede
under his hand and seale, I cannot believe y=t= his Highnes
intended there should be any discontinuance of that Anuity, and
it were very unworthy in me to thinke soe, neither can I give
way to my thoughts to apprehend otherwise of yo=r= Lo=pp= but
you will be pleased to make good his Highnes Acte, although by
the letter of Lawe you may possibly avoyde it; I humbly desire
the signification of yo=r= pleasure in this particular, and
remayne
   Yo=r= Lo=pp's= most humble servant,
   John Jones.
London, 12th March, 1660.

<Q JON 1660 JJONES>
<A JOHN JONES>
<G M>
<P 298>
[^JOHN JONES TO HENRIETTA MARIA STUART^]
To her Highnes Dowager.
Madam,
   You may judge mee exceeding remisse in my duety in not
waiteing in person on yo=r= Highnes to tender y=t= gratitude and
service w=ch= I humbly acknowledge to owe unto yo=r= La=pp= and
w=ch= yo=u= may justly expect from mee as the retourne of very
many kindnesses & favoures yo=u= have been pleased to hono=r= me
w=th=, which I shall have in a very high esteeme as Influence of
an humble Soule in y=e= highest
<P 299>
Pitch of worldly exaltation w=ch= naturally incline our Spirits
to another frame. But beeing informed y=t= y=r= Highnes & yo=r=
ffamily are very highly offended w=th= mee for reasons not yet
come to my knowledge, I humbly conceived it more prudent and
less offencive to forbeare yo=r= presence untill it please God
by some meanes to give mee opportunity to remove those
apprehentions w=ch= yo=r= La=pp= is possessed w=th=, concerning
mee, and w=ch= I dare affirme wilbee found fictitiouse when
honestly & candidly examined. I am loath to menc~on what sadde
impression those missunderstandings seeme to make upon my L=d=
Richard yo=r= Sonne by his interdicting or with holding y=e=
paym=t= of y=t= Anuity w=ch= his late Highnes now w=th= the Lord
settled upon my wife, alleddging y=t= his father had noe Power
to Graunt it, But I hope when he may bee pleased to seriously
consider it, he wilbee more tender of his fathers Hon=r= then to
make his Act under his Hand & Seale voyd. If yo=r= Highnes
please to favoure Justice & the hon=ble= memory of yo=r= late
pretiouse husband soe farr as to advise his Lo=pp= what you
conceive fitt in this particular, and thereby prevent y=e= evill
consequences of a more publique disquisition, you will performe
an Office acceptable to God and aboundantly obligeing to him who
desires to be esteemed & found in y=e= way of Love Truth and
Peace
   Yo=r= Highnes most faithfull & most humble servant,
   Jo. Jones.
4 Apr. 1660.



<B BASIRE>

[^THE CORRESPONDENCE OF ISAAC BASIRE, D.D. ARCHDEACON OF
NORTHUMBERLAND AND PREBENDARY OF DURHAM, IN THE REIGNS OF
CHARLES I AND CHARLES II. WITH A MEMOIR OF HIS LIFE. ED. BY
DARNELL, WILLIAM NICHOLAS. LONDON: JOHN MURRAY. 1831.^]

<Q BAS 1651 FBASIRE>
<A FRANCES BASIRE>
<G F>
<P 107>
[^FRANCES BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
(\A Monsr. Monsr. de Preaumont.\)
   From Eglesclif, February 19, 1651.
My Dearest,
   I haue receiued yours from Missina, dated the last of
Nouember, which is all
<P 108>
I haue receiued sens S. Morkes day. I haue and shal praise God
for his gracious providenc over you, in deliveing you from the
Pope and fryars enuie. I pray God to prosper you stil in the
good successe of your ministery, and to continnue your prudence
and care of your self. I ham sory for your deare frend deth.
Thoue you are not plesed to nam him, yet I thinke I know him -
Ser John Gudrike brother. He tould me his brother was dide of a
pleuresy as he was in his voyage for Englon. He axed me for you,
and desired me to remember him to you. I sow him as I was
retorning from bringing my Lady Blaxton in hear going to see Ser
Willam her husband, wich is a presnor at (^Moretoke^) casel
neare Coventry. My lady now is at Londan, waiting if she can get
him relest, and for the present is put of with good words. Our
dotter Mary is at hom with me, she is (I praise God) a relegos
child, and servesaable to me. Mr. Hums hath tout her to rit. My
lady had a gret love and care of her. I found her all her close
and paid Mr. Broune for teching her on the verginalls. I shall
have a care of all the rest as much as in me lais. I ret to my
frend Busby acording to your desire about Isacke, but neuer had
ansar from him. I very much desire if it ples God to settel you
at Rome, that he may com to you. I do thinke 
<P 109>
he will be a gret comfort to you, and loves rising earlly to go
to coul. When I tel him I haue had a letter from you, he axes if
you haue send for him. Thy are all very well, praised be God,
and present thire duty to you, and John is lerning fast to red a
chapte in the bibel agens Easter, that he may haue breches, and
then he would faine see his father, as I should be if it ples
God to send vs a good oppertunity. I shall rit to Monsieur
Roussell, I have not hard of Peter a long time. I haue send you
a bill of all the monny I haue reseue from you this five yeers
and almost a half, to a farthing, and I haue set doune what I
haue paid out and laid out, in my hous and on my self and oure
chedren. I haue found my vnkle very faithfull and carefull, my
fifths is alowed me still in Mr. Busill's hand, and wall peaid
but much of it gos in seses. I most kindly thanke you for your
deare, louing, and constand care of me, and I do ernestlye
desire to aproue my self what you thinke me in your cherrittabl
good thots of me. All your delit, is wall heare, and I shall
pray and long to heare of your prospring in your besnes and good
settelment agine; my vnkle ret to me that the marchands had
agroeed to (^leon^) every one so much for you to agment your
stipend. I shall just now rit to my Lady Blaxton, and let her
<P 110>
know you are wall. Mrs. Man and Mrs. Garnet, the Dauensons and
Dr. Clarke are wall. My Lady Gercon I thinke is ded, for when I
saw her, theare was no hops of lif.
My Lady Huten was wall, and remembers her to you. Oure good
frend Mrs. Hiington and her husband are both ded, and Mr. John
Kilinggoul. All the res of our neighbours and frends are as yet
wall. My deare respetes and seruis to your good frend Mr.
Tindal.
   Yours as much as euer in the Lord,
   No, more thene euer,
   F. B.
   I praise God for all your contentednes to bare your crosses,
for that is the way to make them eassie and lite to you, to
consedeer from hom thy com, and how gustly wee deserue them, and
how nesserary they are for vs, and how they cannot be auouded in
this lif.
   My dearest, I shall not faille to looke thos plases in the
criptur, and pray for you as be cometh your obedent wife and
serunt in the Lord,
   F. B.

<Q BAS 1653 FBASIRE>
<A FRANCES BASIRE>
<G F>
<P 111>
[^FRANCES BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
(\A Monsieur, Monsieur de Preaumont.\)
Jesu!
   Eaglescliffe, 8th February, 1653.
My Dearest,
   I prais God for your wellfare, but I found it somthing heuie
for me to beare your being so far from me, and being a hole year
but tow dais afore I hard from you, wich is your letter 22 of
July I haue, and your in May to me and your frends, with your
tokens, are mescaried as all mine to you are. Now I rit to you
tow for won, and send them acording to your tow dyrexons. I sent
you a not of the barell of oyle, and of all the parshalls of
coreans you sent me from Zant: but the oyle and the last corans
ware not of the best, wich made them thy gaue not so much as you
thought. I haue all my unkel's letters to show what thy all cam
to, and haue them all rit doune, and all the monnis I haue had
from you, and the twenty pounds you sent me twelue moneths agoe,
when you went for Gerusilem. All your freanes heare ware
exceding glad theare from you, the Dauesens, and Doctore Clarke,
Mrs. Garnet, Mrs. Man, and harty Blad, and our ould seruan, An
Robesson, and all the rest. I haue not hard from our sonn Pette
this tow years. I hau rit to Monsor Rusel very oft, but can not
heare from
<P 112>
him. Present my seruise and deare loue to Doctor Duncom, and
giue him thankes for his cordyouall leter to me. I desire much
to fowllow his direxcion. I shall not faill to pray for your
nobel frend Mr. Daniel Penington, but yet enuie him that he
should enjoy that happines I want. But so that you are wall and
content I hall holy submet to God, tel he see it for me to injoy
what I want. I thanke you very kindly for all your gret and
constan loue to me, thoue so far of and so long as all mos seuen
years. I do ashoure you mine is the sam to you. For Isaac, I
haue ret to my frend Busbe, but haue had no anser. I heaue let
him know by Mr. Carter that you haue ret to him but hit mis
caried, and I ret to her to send me his ansar, and I shall let
you know, and the tim I haue them all with me, I shall, God
willing, bring them vp as well as I can. Our doter Mary is very
seruesabel to me when I ham not wall. I haue ben very sore
trobeled with the stone in the kidney, and a weknes in the bake.
For the ston I have got som qewre, but for my bake I thinke it
will be hard to get it qewored. I prais God I ham very wall, and
I cro fat. Your delite heare is very wall. Oure 4 cheldren heare
present thire
<P 113>
dutty to you. John very much desirs to see his father, for he
sais he is gon so far as he thinke he knas not the way bak, or
els he wants a hors. I pray God send vs all a happy meting.
   I ham your faithful in the Lord, 
   F. B.

<Q BAS 1654 FBASIRE>
<A FRANCES BASIRE>
<G F>
<P 132>
[^FRANCES BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
(^To my good frend Dr. Isaac Basire, this present.^)
Jesu!
   30th May, 1654.
My Dearest,
   Yours of the 27th of February, 1654, I receiued May 22, and
that hath bin all I haue receiued from you sens February 20,
1653, your being so far from me, and the times so very bad, I
could not heare from you, which mad my enimy to threten me to
stay my feft part tel I pruved you were liueing: and ould Tomas
Red began a shut a genst me for the det you ode him, but I being
aduised by my frends to anser the shut, he was glad to let it
fall. I prais God wich hath in abeled me to go throue many
trobels with thankfullnes and conteent. I ded oft thinke of your
direxcion, and I an oure children meet so much oftner at the
throne of grace for you, wich I find now by my one experans the
shoureest refuge. The deuill and the flesh I know hath and will
be besey, but throu God gras in me I haue and shall ouercom
them. My Lady Blaxton is very wall I hop, for a fortnet sens I
had a letter from her. She was then at Lonan but
<P 133>
I looke for her shortly at her one hous. I pray you pray for
her, as she hath constantly dun for you, besids her husbant,
wich is at liberty with her, and is free. Her dotter, the tim my
lady was at Lonan, maried James Sir Wil man, and her father
hering of it sent for her, and she confesed to him she was
maried to him, but the man had rauesed her agenst her will, and
so forsed her to marie with him agenst her will. Her father
beliueing her, caried her vp to Lonant to her mothe to liue with
her priuetly from him. She hath maried another wors then the
ferst. 
   My Lady would often tell me of a saying of yours, oure cros
may be changed, but not removed. So Lord grant what heuer he
ples to send us for a cros wee may vnder go it with christan
pasons. Monser Russel ret to me in Genuary, Pette was wall and
at scoul. He is very wary of your shut. You must lose what thy
owe with pasans, for the one brother has sould all. Hee is
woreth nothing and is miserable, and the other, to awoyd paying,
hath diuorced him selfe from his wife. I haue ret doun Mr.
Jonathan Dawes nam, and I and oure lettel ones will pray for
him. I do assure you I do as much as in me lais to bring vp our
children in the feare and knowledge of God, 
<P 134>
and to keepe them from idlenes, and I prais God I haue comford
of them for ther lerning and [^IN EDITION ad^] piety. My frand
Busby ret to me if I could precure a plas for Isaax in
Wasmenster neare the coule wheare he mit be tabeled, hee would
giue him his bookes and lerning, and what plas fel, with in the
skole or with out, he would do his best for him. But I was not
abel to pay for his diet, and to find him cose in that plas, I
receiuing nothing from you this tow years and all most a half,
but the twenty pounds you sent me from Missina, wich you mean of
at the begining of your trauels. I have not yet reseued the
twelue pouds and the ten pounds, but I hop I shall. Dr. Duncom
did rit to his brothr very ernestly about it, but his brother
could
not do it. Dr. Duncom ret to his brothe he intends for Englant.
Your delit is safe, but I ham com from Mr. Garnet hous, it being
like to fool on oure heds, I have taken one of Mr. Lee hear in
Eaglisclif, and have taken it for 21 yers. I ham seteled heare
with content. Mr. Garnet in all my trubels stands my good frend.
I haue had my feft part granted as yet; but, with much grif and
trobel, but no sertenty of the contenuens of it. Dr. Clark is
wil, and the noble Dauisons, Mrs. Man, and her [\...\] and good
Mr. Panninan, thy all in queare very much of you, and will
regious in your will
<P 135>
being. Mr. Tematie Thriscros ret to me from Lonan a very
comfortable lette, and sent me 5 ponds. 
   The paine of my back and the stone do very much in crec, and
yet I kip fat. I want whit wain to take my pouthers in, heare is
non to be got tht is god. I do hartily prais God for your
prospring in your (^cauling^) , and thy that torn many to
ritousnes thy shall shine as stars. Wee do extremly want you and
your brethern here, for there are very many that is faln from
the faith. Things are very bad for the presan, but it is thot by
all wais men thy will be beter, and then I hop you will in joy
your one with the comford of a good concans, and if you ples to
let me stay heare for a tim tel I see the euent of things, then
as soune as you send I shall with God's assistans abay you,
thoue the sea be neuer so terabel to me. Thoue, Lord, vs direct,
but in no case send for me sotenly, for I trust God in his
prouidens and marci will send you to me, wich is my soul's
thersting desir, and in truth your being so far from me hath ben
som sorow to me when I could not here from you: but I and oure
cheldren do dayly pray for your prospring in your colling. To
God glory, the comford and reliue of vs all.
<P 136>
The cheldren, not knowing any thing, ax me when you will com
hom, and when thy mos go to see you.
   I haue reseuied the tokens you sent me formerly, with the 9
pare of Gerusalem garters. I shall deliuer them according to
thir name.
Dear Husband,
   I haue considered of what you ret to me, and intend
faithfully to abay you as my menester and husband, when you send
for me. All our cheldren are will, and in tret your blesing. My
vnkle Pigott hath reseuied your tow pels of 22 ponds and as
soune as he reseuied the monny he retorns all very saue. Harty
Blad is will, and hould An, and long to see you.
   I ham yours in the Lord
   F. B.

<Q BAS 1654 FBASIRE>
<A FRANCES BASIRE>
<G F>
<P 136>
[^FRANCES BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
(^For my good frend Dr. Isaac Basire, this present.^)
My Dearest,
Jesu!
   I have received your tow letters, the one bering dat the 27
of February and the other dated April 21, and tow bills of
exchange, the one for twelue pouds and the othe bill for ten
pounds more. I haue receiued the 22
<P 137>
pounds from my vnkle Pigott, but had you not send a new bill I
should haue had but ten pounds. I thanke God for your good
health, and Gods speciall prouidence in sending you fauor from a
Protestant prince, wich makes me think of that plas that sais,
see est thou a man dillygent in his colling, he shall stand be
fore princes. I and your children do pray to God that Allmity
God may direct you best for his oner an glory, and the comfort
and relife of vs and oure children. A certen being with the
prince and his honourable maintenance is the beast for oure
present condeson, and dos not hinder vs of oure one heare when
it falls. Ther is hopes wee may injoy oure one agine heare, when
God is plesed to say a men to it. All your frends heare very
much regis in your well fare, the Dauesens, Dr. Clarke, Mrs.
Gernet, Ser John Gudrike, my cosen Swnborn wich cam to see me.
My Lady Blaxton is will, but at Lonan still. Mrs. Man is very
wall, and was heare to see mee, and I gave her your token, and
she dos very much joy in your wall fare, and hath seene your
delit that it is wall: and if you should send for me and oure
cheldren, she will com to see me set forart, and to helpe what
she can. Harty Blade longs to see you. For our 4 children with
me, I do kipe them to skoule, and do bring them vp as wall
<P 138>
as posible j can out of that mens i haue had, the twentiy pounds
you sent me from Missina, and this tow bels of 22 ponds, wich is
all I haue had from you this thre yeares. Dr. Duncom ret to his
brother to lend me som, but he was not a bel to do it. I most
kindly thanke you for all your louing care of me and our
cheldren, and j pray to God that he will giue mee that wisdom
that he requirs from me as I am a wife and a mother, and then I
hop i shall settisfie your expextacion in both, wich is the
desire of my hart to you and them. I shall couer my letters and
rit acording to direxcion. For all I mad my condison with you to
haue two letters for my one, yet I neuer receued any from you
but I anseared them all. Our children present ther duty to you,
and are all wall, and long to see you. 
   Farewall my dearest,
   I ham yours faithful for euer
   F. B.
   Egls., this 18 of July, 1654.

<Q BAS 1655 FBASIRE>
<A FRANCES BASIRE>
<G F>
<P 138>
[^FRANCES BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
Jesu!
   14 of September, 1655.
My Dearest,
   This mounth of September is a houle yeere sens I haue receued
any letter from 
<P 139>
you, your prince sending an agent to my Lord Protetter heare,
and I not heareing from you by him, mad me feare you ware not
with the prince. I did wich most harttily you had ben the agent
your self for by that menes I mit a com to a seean you. I haue
prased God for your saue being with the prens, and for all his
gracsos favoers he hath ben plesed to be stow on you. I and oure
cheldren and my good Lady Blaxton, wich now is at (^Hutten^)
with Ser Willam and remember them to you. Wee do constantly pray
for Prence Gearge and for his Princesse Sofia and young prince
Frencis. I ham very sad that your burthen is so gret as to put
you past your rest, and to feare your helth. For God sake and
mine and your cheldren vndertake no more then you are wall a bel
to go throue. I should prais oure gracious God that may fatch
you ouer to me with liberty of consans, and menes to liue on. I
hop your gracious prence will not let the burthen ly to heuie on
you, if you let him know it. Ser I most kindly thanke you for
your discret loue to me in not commanding rasly and sudenly out
of England. My determinate will is to be obedient to you, and to
kep me constant to my serios resolucion wich I thot I had
satisfed you in my tow former leters. Thes are the chif things I
ame at in my stay from you; the hopes of God
<P 140>
provedens in geuing you your one, the plasing of som of our sons
at Wasmester, and setteling the feft part of them and the
payment of dets, the trayal of the contry how it may a gree with
my weake and sikly body, the vncertainty of the countre by
reason of wars, the remotenes and far destance, the language
vnknowne to me. My earnest desire is that I may haue one of oure
with my frend Busby, wich I could not haue all this tim for want
of a carten a lowans from you, being all most 4 years and
receuing but 22 pounds from you, it hath gon very hard with me,
I haueing the feft part of nothing but the pacheng of Eglescif,
and paying all ses and (^belet^) out of it. I could not spare
twelue pouns a yeere out of it, and durst not venter to send him
vpon vnsertintis, lest he should be dis plesed as Monsieur
Roussall. His letter and poure Peter's I haue sent you. I wich
Peter or Isaac ware with you, won to haue in Frans, and one to
haue with you, and one with my frend Busbe, and two with my
self. If God send me the 50 pounds sauef you haue sent me, I
shall not feale at spring of the yeare to bring or send one of
my sonns to my frend Busbe. You haue not named ho you haue sent
this 50 pounds, by that my vnkle Pigott mit know how to looke
for it. I ham glad you will thanke my vncle Pigott for his care,
and I pray
<P 141>
you present him with som token to ableiage him, and to show oure
thankfull nes. I haue your delight safe with me, and now my
greatist want j haue in my hous is you for a guest, wich God in
his due tim to send me. Oure son John axed me the reson why his
father know how to send a letter, and can not com him self. I
ham in the sam mind you are, that if it ples God we met we shall
liue more comfortably then euer. Mr. Thrrosse has your papers
and will keep them tel he giue them into my one hand. If you
ples to haue Petter with you then could I bring vp Isaac for to
send to freans, and chorls for my frend busby, and then see to
get my fift part mad shour to my cheldren, and reseue your
papers, and looke to the tronke you haue with Mr. Busby. Haue
not giue in any anser to Monser Rosel or my sone. If this
burthen be not to heuie on you you haue a greater blesing than
any of your brethern, for Dr. Clark and Dr. Nealer liue of some
(^temberall^) mens thy haue, but do not prech. Mr. Threscros has
prech and praid acording to youre chorch, and his name is geuen
in and thre core: more that folowed his way. My [\...\] in
Shropshire, my brothe Crene, and sest and brother Bamfeld, are
all wall, but haue all
<P 142>
wasted and ron throu thyr astats, My brothe Renolt Corbett leues
the best. My neuie Andrue Corbett is marryed and leues very
wall, and ret to me if i woull com to him I should be as walcom
as his one wif. My cosin Ramsden is ded, and has left his wif
and ten children more in det than all he had was worth. My
hunkel a lous them som thing ot of the (^percnech^) to leue on.
Mr. Garnet, Dr. Clake, the nobel Dauisons, Mr. Man, Mr.
Pennynton, thy are all very wall, and much goyfull to heare of
you: my deare husbeand I pray to God to send you wisdom and
abelitis health of body, long life to dischard your couling to
the oner and glory of God, the releuef of me and your cheldren:
so prays constantly your faithfull wife
   F. B. 
   All oure cheldren are wall, and present there dutty to you,
and desirs your blesing. Mal is very sersabel to me. She is now
gon to see my Lady Blaxton.

<Q BAS 1656 FBASIRE>
<A FRANCES BASIRE>
<G F>
<P 145>
[^FRANCES BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
(^For Dr. Basire, at his house, Alba Julia, in Transyluania.^)
Jesue!
   Eglesclift, 24th of January, 1656.
My Dearest, 
   I haue receued your three letters sens your safe arriuall to
the prince of Transsluania
<P 146>
is court, and the fiue and fifty pounds sterling. I and our
children do dayly pray for your prince and his princess Sophia,
and the young prince Francis. I will, throue God helpe, as soune
as you sent to my unkle Pigot the hundred pounds, and that I can
order my afars heare to make my self and oure thre children
redy, wich I in tend to take with me. Mary most be one that I
most bring with me; she is so seruisable to mee, that I can
[\...\] in no cas, want her; and I not knowing of any maid or
companan, or man, as yet fet to com with me, Peter and Charls, I
in tend, God wiling, to bring with me, and John to leue at
Eglsclif with oure frends, and Isaac with Mr. Busby. I know I
shall haue all thos olld detters about me when thy know I ham to
go, but I most, with the best aduis and wisdom I can, get to
quiet them, and to peart with som at, to them that stands in the
most ned. I shall haue [\...\] care with the aduis of my best
frends abut your delit to bring saf with me, and shuch of my
best housold stof as is fet. About June or July I shall, God
willing, obbay you and your prince's desirse, in leueing my one
natif contry, kindred, and frends, in coming to you. You most
neds thinke it will be som grif to me at the present, but I
trust in God and you wich will be abel to soplay the want of
all. Ser 
<P 147>
Willam Blaxton, his good lady, and Mr. Gernet, the Dauessons are
all wall, and very glad to heare of your wallfare, but sead to
peart with us from hens. I shal not forget the sednes of my Lady
Blaxton contennens when I tould her you had sent for me. God
Allmitty reward heare and Ser Willam for all thyr love to vs.
Mary is now with her. I shal beg consil of God, and take advis
of my best frends conserning all my afears heare. Tow of oure
sons most be left heare in Ingland, or thy can haue no feft
part. Mounsir Rousill hath ret to me agin, and I haue ret, I
haue sent his letters to you, and haue not yet had your anser;
but I haue ret to hem to intret his care of Peter, and that I
intend at spring when I com to Lonan to send for him and to let
him know what condeson you are in, and that it is yure desire to
haue him com with me; and thoue for the present you ware not
abel to settifis his bels be cos of oure present expenes, yet as
sown as we can we would with all thankefullnes. I haue ret to
Pette. And now, my dearest, I ntret your prayers for me and oure
lettel ones. I intent, God willing, to be const in my
ressolucion to com to you, without I shall haue just occasons to
see you heare, or som gret danger in my peseg as I know not of.
Our cheldren
<P 148>
and frends are all wall, and desire yor blesing. I shall euer
remine 
   Yours faithfull in the Lord,
   F. B.

<Q BAS 1661 FBASIRE>
<A FRANCES BASIRE>
<G F>
<P 203>
[^FRANCES BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
Jesu!
My Dearest,
   I prays God for your halth and save coming to your gornys
end. I like your ressolusion of takeing concill of God and your
good frends, wich of thes nomber I pray you make Ser Pilip
Worwicke one of the chif. I pray you presend my best serves to
him, and thanke him for me. I have sent you his loveing letter,
and I ded open it to see what it did consern. I am very glad Mr.
Busbe is liveing, and I hope at the spring of the yeare you will
have your cheldren to lern with him. I am very sorry my Cosin
Pigot cannot col to mind your booke. I gave it to him by your
order with my one hand, and I ded see him le it in his lettel
closet wich was in his parler at London, and prid him to have a
gret care of it, and then he caried me to a hie loueft, and
shoud me a gret box or chest of bookes of yours, that he had
reseved of Mr. Andreus. I wish you may rit to Dr. Hud about your
trunke you left with him, for it never cam to Mester Busbey. If
you may have your choys, next to the glory of God, chus that
wich my bring you the most 
<P 204>
present profet, and do your frends the most good. Remember Dr.
Smolwod, and this bearer, Mr. Ouelefer, hath ben very redy to
serve your Cure, and if you can do him any sevel kinnes in his
besnes, I pray youe do it for him. Deke Carter is coming to his
mother agin; I wish you would axe her what is oing to her, and
pay her it. My Cosen Sknner and Pegort will stay. John Howly and
Mrs. Carter and my good Cosen Skener will help you to by what
you of nesesity must have for housold stof, and send it done in
Wiginers ship. All your frands heare are wall. I pray you
remember me to my Deare Brother Thriscos, and all the rest of my
frands. So with my dayly prayers to God for you, I desire to
remene your faithfull loveing and obedent wif 
   F. B.
   10 November, 1661.

<Q BAS 1662 PBASIRE>
<A PETER BASIRE>
<G M>
<P 219>
[^PETER BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
   Rouen, this 12th of 10=bri=, 1662.
Reverend Sir, and most loving Father,
   This reiteracon, since your last to me (by Esq=e= Balmley's
favour,) being my 3d, I might a little wonder, but reflecting
upon Tibullo's saying,
(\Pluribus intentus minor est ad singula sensus.\)
I desist: your faithfull friend, Mr. R. (who, since his
arrivall, told me he had writt to you from Orleans,) did weekes
agoe expect a line from you; [\...\] he, uncertain to write,
presents his services to you; wee have not as yett (by reason of
his urgent affaires) dispatched with your adverse party, but as
soone as wee shall have put a period to part of his obstinate
and allmost implacable litigacons, I shall, (God willing) give
you an ample account. It would not prove amisse, if (without an
inconveniency) which I fear you cannot, (\vous pouvies preparer
<P 220>
le Racquittes de cette Rente (Sixiesme) que Tocque a acquis au
nom de sa Femme\) . Do=r=. Brevint did honour me with a Lre.
from Paris about 3 weekes agoe, in answer to which I thanked him
for the favour he did proffer me, as yet unnecessary; the
Messrs. de Langle, Jeansse, and Le Moyne, tender their humble
service to you. If you would honour the last with a line, he
would take it for a great favour, you being a person after whose
intelligence and conference he dayly aspires. His repute is not
ordinary, but beares the characther of a profound student. I
find, and that by experience, that liberty of conscience is a
more precious pearle than those which jewellers adventure, by
sea, land, and fyre, to attaine; wee have here on the one side
Babylon, which under the pretexte of religion and visor of piety
runs into a labyrinth of superstition, yet filling the aire with
boasting of their workes, when most men know, and you of all
other, that her wayes are but like the tyger's skin, as if the
Thisle could bragge of her Figgs, or the Thorne vaunt itself
against the Vyne of Canaan, saying her berries are better grapes
than hers. On the other side, we have the Presbyterian
Protestants, who to avoid Charybdis (Superstition, nay innocent
ceremonies unfittly termed Charybdis) run headlong upon Scylla, 
<P 221>
(Irreverency, most sinfull and undecent); betwixt both, it is
very difficult to practice (I meane to (\Faex Populi\) ,) what
learned Mercer judiciously observes, that the same words in
Hebrew, which signifyes an eare, in the duall signifyes a pair
of balances, [^GREEK OMITTED^] (\et\) [^GREEK OMITTED^] , (\ut
os cibum, sic mens verba\) , saith Chrysostome. The one speaking
in an unknown tongue, the other with such rethoricall
flowrishes, that, (\potius sua munera, quam audientium Vulnera
demonstrat\) . I find your words most true, no church like
England. The late stormes have proved the losse of many French,
both vessels and men; because only upon her coasts. It is
generally reported here, that the King of France prepares an
irreconcileable warre with his lord the Pope. I wish it may
throw his triple crowne to the grounde. I intreate you to desire
Mr. Actham by your next to send me your Lres. directly to Mr. R.
by the post, and not by Mr. Cognard's correspondent, because I
p'ceive a p'judice upon me. Humbly beseeching God to direct,
further, and perfect all your affaires, both eccli'cal and
temporall of the next succeeding yeare, as also devoutly craving
the continuance of your prayers and blessing, I remaine,
   Reverend Sir, 
   and most loving Father,
   Your very obedient Son,
   P. B.
<P 222>
   I humbly intreate you to p'sent my duty to my Mother,
desireing her blessing, likewise my love to my Brothers and
Sister. P'don, I beseach you, my presumption.

<Q BAS 1665 IBASIREJR>
<A ISAAC BASIRE JR>
<G M>
<P 237>
[^ISAAC BASIRE JUNIOR TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
I. H. S. 
   (^Isaac Basire to Dr. Basire.^)
Reverend Sir,
   At Cambridge I was on the 4th of this instant, when I
received both your's dated the last week: within two houres of
the receipt I set forward for London: I have left the chief of
my business at Cambridge undone, as my own exeat, my Bro. Ch.
settlement, and a chamber for him, my Br. P. admission, &c., all
w'ch will cost mee a journy back for 2 or 3 daies. 
   Yours to Dr. Busby, then very busy, I delivered in my riding
habit, that to Mr. Sayer (who entertaines mee with a great deall
of civility and thankfulness) on the 6th of May; to my Ld. of
Winchester and Mr. Eyles, I p'esented theirs the same day; my
Lo. Grace of Canterbury was then in the room: as soon as my Ld.
had read your letter, his Lp. told mee he would not write then,
(I heard they were going to sit in councill, and the French
Ambassador had publick audience that day) but appointed mee to
come and receive the answer to-morrow morning, betwixt 7 and 8. 
   Mr. Durell is at Windsor, and will not be in town till next
week. Mr. Sayer can p'cure
<P 238>
mee a bill of exchange payable in France, so that I shall need
but as many livres as I shall need in France till my bill be
paid. 
   Yesterday I was with Dr. Busby; in these words he gives my
brothers a character, (^they are industrious and good 
children^) , that my Br. Ch. has learning, and is much improved
since his coming up, and that very many not so good scholars as
he are gone from his school to the university. The Dr. will not
p'mise that he is so exquisite and every way qualified as you
desire. His advice is, ( (^you know very well his way and
humour^) ,) that you should call him down to you to try yourself
and to give him your instructions (w'ch may be done, as to mee
it was, by letter) for his behaviour and studys in the
University. The Dr. gave mee his benediction when I took my
leave, and desired mee to sup with him and our D. of Durham this
night, (whom I have waited on yesterday morning). If Dr. Busby
say no more concerning my Bro. I will follow your former
instructions and take him to Cambridge and admit him; from
thence if you please (which I hope you need not) you may send
for him to you. 
   By the next you will receive my Lo. Bp.'s answer and an
account of what I could not dispatch by this. I humbly beg your
good prayers 
<P 239>
for prosperity in all our undertakings and for a blessing upon, 
   Sir,
   Your dutifull son,
   Isaac Basire.
Westminster, May 7, 1665.
   P.S. You may please to direct your's at my brother's lodgings
here.

<Q BAS 1665 PBASIRE>
<A PETER BASIRE>
<G M>
<P 239>
[^PETER BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
I. H. S. 
   Very Rev. Sir and loving Father,
   The newes of your arrivall (I hope safe, I am sure prayed
for,) I receive with joy and thankefulness, seeing I am deprived
of, (upon what account truly I know not, however submitting to
my mother's com'and) wayting upon you in p'son. This proxy, 1.
tenders my H. duty to you; 2. craves your blessing, and, 3.
gives you the inclosed account of my time, spent according to
your charge. I do not alledge those deductions directly to
apologize for my idlenes, but that you may see the naked truth
and sincere account; and if you shall judge that I have not well
spent my time, I humbly begge pardon, and promise endeavour of
amendment; but if otherwise, then it will 
<P 240>
prove matter of encouragement and comfort to have answered your
expectation. Thomas White is to give you an account of other
concerns. I am here ready, 1. to obey your commands; 2. to
endeavour to become serviceable (to my power) unto you; 3. to
approve myselfe ( (\factis et verbis\) ) every day more and
more. 
   Very Reverend Sir and loving Father,
   your sincerely obedient son, and humble servant,
   Peter Basire.
July 13, 1665, Stanhop.

<Q BAS 1666 IBASIREJR>
<A ISAAC BASIRE JR>
<G M>
<P 249>
[^ISAAC BASIRE JUNIOR TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
(^For the very Rev. Dr. Basire, at his house in Durham.^)
Jesu!
Rev. Sir,
   Y=rs= of the 3d I haue received. Mr. Churchill is at his
countrey-house in Somersetsh'. It will not be amisse to imploy
Mr. Jones, of our house in his stead. I will first try him, I
thinke he will be faithfull. In my last I gave you notice that
my Ld. of Carlisle had writ to the Deane, he writ also to you at
the same time, and enclosed in yours a coppie of his to the
Deane; the B'p would haue a letter writ as from the D. and
Chapter, touching the Abridgmt' of the Privileges of the see,
the publick ills, the private losses which might ensue upon the
grant of the bills, as also
<P 250>
to appoint some p'son (a lawyer) from them to speake these
things to the comittee; my L'd B'p of Carlisle brought mee to
the B'p of Exeter, who, upon my begging it, laid his hands on
mee, and blessed me. He was pleased to inlarge upon your worth,
and say that the Church of England was much beholding to you. I
acquainted him with the whole business, he would haue mee bee at
the comittee myselfe with him that speaks in the name of the D.
and Ch. that I may answer to what these may object, but then you
will be open to the B'p of D.'s language, and what else he can
doe. The B'p of Exeter saies, that will be nothing; however, you
will be so wise as to keep out (I mean as single,) as much as
you can. Mr. Rushworth has been very busie, and not to be met
with. To-morrow morning wee are to meet at his house in Danby
Lane, in the Strand. I was at Mr. Swaddell's lodging and missed.
I hope to settle your correspond' with him, however, I shall
part with the other at the day. I haue writ to Mr. Roussell and
Mr. Jeanse, and Mr. Brathwait, who cannot be with you possibly
at the day you menc'oned to mee: my brothers are well yet at
Colne. 
   The Deane of Paul's has given 40s. for Tuvill's use, God
reward him! I shall move Mr. Fframpton to speak to the Master of
the 
<P 251>
Rolls, who is to allow, as from the publick, something to
converts in this kind. 
   The Hungarian I shall visit and doe your comands to him and
the rest, as soon as [\...\] busines in Parliam't be over
[\...\] if he stay to see an end of this bill, will not be in
the countrey time enough at the examination, which is something
considerable.
   Mr. Brewer's men came to mee for money. Something I doubted
of, and so would not pay all till I speak with the master. 
   The terme draws neare, wee must p'vide, and see to get
something done to the purpose. God speed!
   Money will goe quicker away than before. I see I cannot stirr
hence till next terme be over, it may be a good while after. 
   S'r Ph. R. has been, and is yet ill, I intend to wait on him.
I pray, Sir, give mee your blessing, whilst I am, 
   R'd S'r,
   Your obedient Son,
   Isaac Basire.
Gray's Inne,
Jan. 8, 1666. 
   My duty to my mother, &c.

<Q BAS 1666 PBASIRE>
<A PETER BASIRE>
<G M>
<P 254>
[^PETER BASIRE TO ISAAC BASIRE SENIOR^]
(^To the verie Reverend Dr. Basire, at his Prebendary House in
the Colledge of Duresme, Durham.^)
Reverend Sir,
   Mr. Peck intends the next weeke to meete Mr. Grove, and get
the key of his study, to get his booke which is in the Colledge,
<P 255>
and then may you have the whole of our accounts. That you have
them no sooner is not our fault, but our tutor's, who promised
to send his booke three moneths ago, but wee have not seene him
since. He is in Kent, with the Lord Maidstone, his pupill.
Notwithstanding this neglect of his, he is thought to be a man
every way worthy, and is beloved of the M'r. He hath touched all
the monies you have sent, but when you are pleased to send
againe, it were not amisse rather to let my bro' Isaac touch it.
The p'ticulars of our last quarter's dyet (to wit, from the 22th
of June to Michaelmas Day,) my bro' Charles doth send you, I
shall therefore here only instance generally what it hath cost
me this quarter. 
[^BILL OMITTED^]
   Wee might table out for +L4 a qre., but Mr. Peck thought to
have lessened expenses by keeping house: what to do, he resolves
not till
<P 256>
he see Mr. Grove. May it please you to send me my trunke, for I
want some winter cloathes in it. You may direct it to be left at
Mr. Finche his house in Lynn (a noted man,) to whome I have
spoken about it. It may come from Newcastle to Lynn, and thence
by water 30 miles, till it come within a mile of our Colne
towne. The want of a bed and 2 paire of sheetes, puts me to the
charge of 11sh. a qre. Besides this quarterly expenses, all the
members of colledges are put to charges in detriments, though
absent. The Lord remove from us the occasion of our abode here!
expecting which, I remaine, 
   Reverend Sir,
   Your dutifull Son,
   Peter Basire.
Colne, 8=ber=, 13, -66.
   Be pleased to present my h. service to the Reverend Mr.
Wrench. May you not be offended that I name Tobacchow here, for
lesse I take than I did by halfe, each day, stinting myselfe,
but I pay a dearer rate for it. I beseech you, vouchafe (if
safe) to send me my trunke, for I want a trunke, and would buy
none.



<B TIXALL>

[^TIXALL LETTERS; OR THE CORRESPONDENCE OF THE ASTON FAMILY, AND
THEIR FRIENDS, DURING THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY. VOL. II. ED. BY
CLIFFORD, ARTHUR. LONDON: LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN
AND EDINBURGH: ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND CO, AND JOHN BALLANTYNE
AND CO. 1815.^]

<Q TIX 1656 WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 5>
[} [\LETTER XL.\] }] [^WINEFRID THIMELBY TO MRS HERBERT ASTON^]
   Dearst dearst Sister,
   Were it possible to be angry with you, these lins wod chide
yr kind folly, in desiring my picture: for besides the idle
expence, twas my advantage to be drawn by that neate pencil of
yr love, wch I am sure enough would flater me in every kind. But
I must confes, since you pretend to likenes, you may with more
justice aske, then I deny another painter; therefore I must
yealde, and the truth is, I can deny you nothing. As for the
present, we are frighted with some feares of new trobles with
you. If the tempest blow over, you may expect to see me this
sommer. But when, O
<P 6>
when, shall I see you. It is my dayly comfort to remember how
fast we approach each other, and that every moment dispatches
some part of the way: this makes me content with present
absence, nay even love it. Forgive the sound of that last word,
and consider the sence of it. For I pretend not to a good
expression, but clame yr beleefe I meane as well, as truest love
can teach; and really, sister, you cannot imagin how much the
memory of you gives increase of very solid ioy. For when I looke
upon the condition I might have expected, or hoped for in the
world, methinks, I am so sorry twas noe better, noe greater,
that I might have left, and contemed something worthy my
pretentions. But when I cast my eyes upon the tresures of my
loved friends, and in perticuler yr sweetest selfe, I grow
hugely comforted, because Ile not allow the world could give me
better. I mean kinder, dearer. Therefore, you must give me leave
to love our seperation, because it helps to secure an eternall,
mutuall, inioying.
<P 7>
   You must be sure to present my humblest, and most afectionate
service to my Lady Wessen. Tis really my cross I never deserve
her sisters kindnes; they also have a brother here, who is as
kind as good. If you knew him, you would know this. A very great
expression. (^The best is, they are such noble friends, tis no
paine to be obliged^) . Say all you can of kindnes to my brother
Aston. My hart will be sure to make it good. Is he as willing to
give me a child as you? If so, I shall have very great hopes. Be
sure if I dye before you can compasse it, cheange not yr
resolution: the child will loose noe happines by want of me. I
forgot to tell you, I shewed yr letter to my lady Mary, who
sweetly blusht at that conserned herselfe. Pleased with yr prety
kind complaint; yet bids me tell you, the fault was all yr own
you were noe more acquainted; for she did covet it, but could
not fasten on you, you were so
<P 8>
extremely silent; wch, I must confesse, she is not in yr
prayses. But, by her discourses, adds to that sea, wch flowes,
but never yet knew ebbe. I would be understood the love of yr
most affectionate sister,
   W. T.
   I have not a iot of my sisters haire: mine is too short to do
any thing with; but take it as it is. The gray haires you will
account my sisters, for she made them so.

<Q TIX 1650S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 9>
[} [\LETTER XLI.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO MRS HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Dearest dearest Sister,
   Why after so long a patience, will you mix my ioy with such
distast, to find you shuld the least suspect a change of hart in
me, because you heare not from me. I may as well complayne,
sence tis a whole yeare sencce I receaved line from you, and
then I presently answered it, to stopp your kynd folly, (give me
leave to call it so), which desyred to have my picture drawen.
Take notis, I was the last that writ: for it was then, you
mentioned so many perticulers of your new house, all which I
answered; but it is not the first of mine wch hath miscaried:
for really, I have never mised any oportunitie wch gave any
hopes of aryving you. So carfull selfe love made me, to soe my
seede, in hope to reape the pleasing fruit of yr answers. But,
when they fayled, I never did
<P 10>
admitt a thought your love did so. Sweet sister, doe the same by
mee, who willingly confesse, you goe before me, in all except a
constant love: but ther, Ile give no place. Know therfor, though
you shuld never hear from me, (which yet shall never be when I
can helpe it), I am as dayly mindfull of you, my brother Aston,
and yours, as of my selfe. Really, I tell you this, with as much
truth can be. It is not possible for me, to forgett you one day,
so much I am, and can not chuse but bee
   Your most affectionat sister,
   Winefrid.
   I injoy my health, methinkes, but too well; sence itt delayes
my meeting with my sister Franck. However, know, I am won of the
hapiest persons living; though still methingkes, I shuld be
hapior diing. Sweet sister, when you rite to me, allwayes give
notis of how my lady Aston dus. Her sister, my Lady Mary Weston,
desyres itt of you; and really she dus so hugely oblige me with
continuall kyndnis, I
<P 11>
shall be mitty glad to serve her, in any kynd. Her chambers are
almost finished, and we hugely taken with her sweet
conversation.
   Why did you not rite me some perticulers of your sweet
children. How dus my pore Keat with the ricketts? Remember I
must have won. Oh tell me what hopes.
   I never had line from brother Ned, sence he leaft you, but
heard he intended to winter hear; if brother Thim- give leave;
to whom I rite to beg that comfort; but hear no answer.
   I think Dick is dead, at least to me. But I cannot say,
(\requiescat in pace\) .
   Lets always rite when we can, and have patience when we
cannot, so shall we be more hapy when we meet whonce agen. Know
certeynely my hart can never change to you.
   You have many frinds, who will not lett me seal my letter,
without incloasing ther kyndest love.

<Q TIX 1659? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 12>
[} [\LETTER XLII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Hond. dear Brother,
   Though you have pleased so soone to drye my teares, yet you
have filld my hart with other greafe, to finde myselfe so
deepely in your debte, both in regarde of my deare sister, and
my selfe, without hope of ever paying you, tell harts shall be
revealed. But then, I am certaine, all which you layd out upon
me, will appeare dischardged upon loves score; for ther I dewly
paye. I know not what to say concerning my picture. Twas as far
from my thoughts, as from reason, to imagin you shuld desyre it
now: but since you are so strangely kynd, methincke I shuld be
as strangely coye, if I shuld not afford my sisters picture that
advantage it will gaine by myne; therfore I shall not fayle to
send it. I suffer much with you, concerning
<P 13>
your great charge. I have as many hopes, as you have cares: tis
onely your burthen, under which I growne, as fearing you may
fainte. For them I rest secure, so longe as God preserves them
such a father; for which I dayly pray. Therfore I silence all my
owne repining thoughts, and tune them to comfort, by hope you
will beleeve this great, though hiden truth, that I inheritt all
my sisters dearly dere respects to you, and love of your sweet
little ones.
   Your most affectionat,
   though unworthy sister,
   Win. Thim.
   I fear to suffer in yr thoughts, as one to much incroaching
upon goodnes, whylist I beg you will please, at yr best leysure,
to send that loved relation of my sisters death, my brother
Harry so much ioys to have. Forgive me, tis a bold request.

<Q TIX 1659 WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 14>
[} [\LETTER XLIII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Hond. dear Brother,
   I have the dear content of receaving your most obliging
lines. All the thanckes I can give, I entreat you will take, as
interest for what I owe. The whole summe I confesse myself not
able to pay; but though I looke upon your kyndnis as now aryved
to a (\non plus ultra\) , and am delighted in giving it the
wellcome, yet I find one distast, and must complayne, why you
dispence onely comforts, and conceile your cars. I must share of
all. Your good nature, I am sure, can not be ignorant of the
great satisfaction is found in suffering wth our frinds: Na, it
puts downe all joyes (I meane temporall) wherin they are not
concerned; and why then, not a word of thos poore sweet
children, that have the rickets, or any other suffering of
yours? Indeed you must not deale so with me. See, how redily I
lay clame to the
<P 15>
privilege your kindnis gave me, of confidently asking any thing
of you. This is my request, and in this is included all my
desyres; except your beleefe, I shall ever, ever retayne my
sisters hart to you and yours.
   I have obeyed you, my picture is drawen by the best payneter;
one, that hath the esteem of drawing much to the life. But still
my hardest taske is to performe, why lest I must tell you; it
cost 40 shillings. O the shame! Did not your commands give
countnance, and content; sence, tis as much the picture of your
kyndnis, as of me; and thus methinckes tis cheape. I have rite
to my brother Harry, to inquire for it, of Mr Foster, who lives
at the Venetian imbassidors; for thither I shall direct it, with
a few pittyfull toakens for your children. But, if you looke
upon them, with that kindnis, they are sent, they will expresse
what words cannot, without wronging
   Your most affectionat,
   though unworthy sister,
   Winefrid Thim.
<P 16>
   My Lady Mary Weston presents her humble servis. Next time you
rite, thanck her for me. For my obligations are very many, and
great.

<Q TIX 1660S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 17>
[} [\LETTER XLIV.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Sep. 12.
   Hond. deare Brother,
   How strangely kynd are you, in coveting my empty lynes, sence
all my store of selfe love could never flatter me into the
deceat of the least satisfaction in them, further then as I
consider them seede of yours; but now, you please to give
incouragement another way; for your desyre gives worth: which
great truth cannot be denyed; but give me leave to ad another. I
ever found shame and pitty greatest paynes; and truely you put
me to both. Whats my shame every line can tell you: consequently
my pitty; though more obscurely rit, for selfe love is never
willingly unmasked. All
<P 18>
this whyle I say nothing; my bisinis is begging, with all
importunity, I request, as you love my peace, and patience,
beleeve I have enoufe to pay all thos great and many debts I owe
your kyndnis; but so fast sealed up, that death can onely open.
If I meet you not just then, what matter? You know who will be
ready to receive all that is dew to you; and with her helpe, I
may be able to convaye somethinge towards my discharge, tell we
can meete.
   Is it not strange, I shuld have nothing to say for Keat: my
sylence speaks your love; for wear I not assured she inioyes the
best father, I shuld conceive itt my duty to wooe for the best
chyld; but your car cuts of all myne: yet I wod faine know more
perticulers concerning her health, and if she grow. I am
strangely ioyed in the hopes you give us, that her meanes will
be recovered.
   Sweet Jesus grant itt so. How willingly shall I singe a
(\nunc dimittis\) , when I see Keat as happy as my self, I mean
as contented, for true hapinis consists in goodnis; and
wheresover she
<P 19>
bee, I hope she will exceede me in that; for I can boast of
nothing but your favour, and the profesion, that I am, as much
as Keat can wish,
   Your most affectionat sister,
   Win.

<Q TIX 1660S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 20>
[} [\LETTER XLV.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Hond. deare Brother,
   Saving my quarill, a thousand thanckes for yr sweet
condescendance, in letting me know part of yr, now my
afflictions: though, for the first, I am more angry than sad: it
seemes a kynd of ridle, you had need expound it to me, how you
can wish to dye, pretending love to her, who, by yr death, would
dye yet ten times more: for, have you any chyld can live, much
lesse, live well, without you? Besydes, you know, tis saufest
living, when we least inioye; and, sence the sadnis of your
condition helpes to secure you are in the right way, for pitty,
be content to goe att such a rate, as all your little flocke may
see yr steps, and follow you; and heer it is, I see my selfe
with much compassion. For, though wholy unprofitable to any
frind of mine, and, I feare, even to my selfe; yet cannot find
the way to dye. Doe but looke
<P 21>
upon your owne advantage in this poynt, and I am confident, you
will equally derive patience for your selfe, and pitty for me,
   Your most affectionate sister,
   Winefrid.
   My picture lyes yet at Brudges, in a frinds hand, who
watcheth opportunity to send it with saufty; could it speake my
thoughts to you, I shuld not blush to have you take such car for
itt. O no, I shuld be hapy, did you know what kynd thoughts I
have to you and yours, which never can take change.
   My Lady Mary desyres you receave her humble servise. She
tooke your letter very kyndly; and bids me tell you, she beares
a part both of yr crosse and hapines. But your strange inventive
kyndnis will doe yr selfe some servise; for I shall no more
importune yr thanckes in my behalfe: it cost me too much shame.
My dearest love to all yr children. I fear I am a little
partiall to Jacke.

<Q TIX 1660S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 22>
[} [\LETTER XLVI.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Agust 22.
   Hond. Deare Brother,
   I must begin wher you end the first part of yr letter, for
all, tell then, is far above what I can answer, and infinitly
beyond my desert. But o the force of truth! I am strangely in
love with it, which tooke from yr eyes that multipliing glace,
through which you are ust to looke upon the seeming good in me.
Jesus, what doth my brother Aston say, what meanes he? Upon
another score, thinck what my dear sister, I hope now in heaven,
wod have me pay you; who never rit without this coniuration.
(^Be sure you infinitly love and honore Mr Aston, who makes me
the hapiest creature in the world.^) Thinck if it wer possible
to deny a sister, and such a sister, such a request, which even
justice wod have rong from the flintiest hart. Well then, all
that she desyred is, and will ever be
<P 23>
ready for you; please to receave it, and, when you are payed, it
is still intyre. For I never found love of that nature, to
diminish by dealing out, but rather lyke fire, take increase the
farther itt spreads. But alas! myne is onely the passive part; I
can act nothing in order to your comfort, or my owne. Suffer I
doe beyound expression, in the small hopes of ever seeing Keat
so hapy as my selfe. I dar never mention itt to her, for, on
that proiect, I could better spend teares then inck. This sad
thought puts me quit out of saying more then that I constantly
am
   Your most affectionat sister,
   Win. Thim.
   Nothing must make me forgett my most humble, dear respects,
to sweet Mrs Ger. Aston. I am proud she is pleased to remember
so poor a servant.

<Q TIX 1660S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 24>
[} [\LETTER XLVII.\] }] [^LETTER NUMBERED XXXIV IN THE EDITION^]
[^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT ASTON^]
   Honored Deare Brother,
   'Twas great discretion to publish such ioyes as yr last
promised, long before ther tyme; both to temper the discomfort
of our present seperation, and, by a quiet, hopefull
expectation, moderate that excess, which so unexpected a
happinis would have caused in mee, in case I had bine surprised
ther with. But you must answer for a greater fault, (because of
longer continuance, I cannot say more voluntary) my great
impatience; how shall I reckone the houres, how shall I fall out
with tyme for ever; now as too slowe, then, I am sure, too
quicke; after that, scarce to bee indured, except sweet Keate
prevaile to reconcile us, for a whyle. However, tis my comfort,
time distroyes itt selfe; whylest itt tiraniseth over us, we are
sure to ont live itt, and dying live,
   Your most affectionat sister,
   Winefride Thim.

<Q TIX 1660S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 25>
[} [\LETTER XLVIII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Honored Deare Brother,
   You are, I see, resolved, I must never answer you in your
owne language, tis pride enouf to understand itt; and equall
comfort to find my stamering understood so well by you. This is
my incouragement to speake of such a sister, such a chyld;
though no worce pen then your owne can doe them justice. But
sence your kyndnis is my kynd interpretor, I shall not fear to
give you som acoumpt of them. First, for our dearest sister,
though her eyes' deluge not yet wholy ceaced, yet who can repine
att so hapy a flood, which has raysed her to the contemplation
of heaven, wher such pearlls as her teares contribute with other
jewells to the ritches of that ocean of delight.
<P 26>
   Keat also goes along with much smoothnes, not knowing any
thing but hapines. Yet can complaine, she must expect so longe
before she be a nun. In won word, they both bereave me of the
loved payne of kynd solicitudes; they leave me nothing to wish;
I have but won desyre between them, yet wholl to both, which is,
continuance of that peace the world cannot give. Oh may ther
soles glide in this sweet streame, till they arrive at that
torrent of delights wch heaven prepares for them and you, wher
you may perhaps meete
   Your most affectionat sister, though now unworthy Wine.
   I wod faine be knowne to every chyld of yours, though ther
poorest ante, yet the most truly affectionat.

<Q TIX 1660S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 27>
[} [\LETTER XLIX.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Hond. Deare Brother,
   I have not, without much resentment, long deprived myselfe of
the delight of hearing from you; for I am so aquanted with your
constant kyndnis, that I conclude, had I written, I had ere this
been hapy by yr answers. But, the truth is, I have partly beene
hindered by my owne infirmity, but cheefly by poore Keates; whos
ill health so hindered her learning, she could not sooner obay
your comaund in wrighting. She is now to take the spawe waters,
so that I hope my next will tell you better newes of her.
Truely, I must acknowledge God allmightes wisedome shynes
equally with his goodnis in her, that so sweetly tempers my
ioyes; wch otherwyse would passe the bounds of moderation. For
had she health, I shuld fynd too much comfort in this world's
banishment; our dear sister Thimelby goeing forward so beyound
expectation,
<P 28>
every way. Upon Michallmas day she makes her profession;
perticulars of wch Keat is resolved to tell you in her next. She
forgott to aske whither you have receaved her toakens, and
feares they have mischaried, as did the manuall you sent her. I
find my paper filled, before I have sayd any thing of that wch
most fills my hart; my constant duely dear respects, and all a
hart can owe, which, though not all expressed, yet momently
payed by
   Your most affectionat, other wyse most unworthy sister Win.
   My dear love to all yours. You must favour me delivering itt
perticulerly to every one. Lady Mary is extremly kynd to us all
three.

<Q TIX 1660S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 29>
[} [\LETTER L.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT ASTON^]
(^For her Hond. Dear Brother, Mr Herbert Aston, this present,^)
att Bellamore.
   Hond. Deare Brother,
   You doe so confound me with yr high and sweet expressions,
that, though I have more to say than ever, I never knew lesse
how to speake then now; yet, will not helpe my selfe with that
ould mistaken principall, as you call itt, and urge that love is
blind; and such the prospective by wch you looke on me. No, I
find rather, that yr kyndnis resembles a multiplying glace,
wherin you see small meritts great, and by that, judge of mee
farr from the truth.
<P 30>
Really, I wod faine put a scruple in yr mynd of flattering me.
Forgive that word, and understand, I am as confident it is not
so in you, as I am unhapy in finding my demeritt tornes itt so
to me. But enouf of this sad subject; I must have place to
comunicate my ioys. Our dear sister hath now changed murning
into whight attire. Oh had you seen the solemnity, I am
confident yr hart wod not have contained all the ioy, but shed
som att yr eyes. Keat was the bearer of her crowne; was itt not
fitt she shuld, who meanes to duble itt, in the last, and
lasting nuptiall feast? No less then heaven can dim the splendor
of this glorius day. All thinges wear so compleatly acted, both
by bride, and
<P 31>
bridmayde, that my brother Ned and I wear not a lettle goodly.
Poore Keat longes to tell you the whole stoary, but alas, she
cannot rite in hast, having discontinued her practis allmost 3
munths, upon too iust excuse. My sister has promised to tell you
all perticulers of her infirmity, wch, thanckes be to God, she
hath now well recovered, though itt cost me first many a hart
ake; but had you seene her cariage in receiving yr little
letter, she knew neither how to expresse her ioys, or manyfest
her love, to her owne satisfaction: though we can all wittnis,
she discharged herselfe very well of both. For pitty, rite
againe, for this letter is allmost quit worne out with her
continuall kissing it. She impatiently expects yr long letter,
promised wth her bro. Jack's, and sister Cons., and feares her
not riting now will deprive her of them; but I have undertaken
to beg it may not, which I earnestly doe, by all the kyndnis
wherby you honore and oblige
   Yr most affectionate sister,
   Win.
   My dear dear love to Jacke, and all the rest as in
perticuler.

<Q TIX 1670S? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 35>
[} [\LETTER LII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Hond. Deare Brother,
   Though you have forgiven much in all my letters, yet this
will take a greater proofe of your indullgence to mee, wher I
must confess a high iniustice in so much repyning to lend you
backe your owne, though even my owne dim judgment discovers itt
best, both in regard of her present and future happynes, besydes
the warrent of greater and better lights who plainely see itt
the onely meanes to recover her. But of this and all perticulers
my sister will best informe you. Her's the active, mine the
passive part. I am strangely confounded to fynd so much selfe
love, wher I lest suspected it, none living could have perswaded
me I could have suffered any thinge in order to Keat's good, but
now I blushingly confesse tis time she retorne to Bellamore,
till I lerne how
<P 36>
to love. And though I cannot passe the seaes with her, I am sure
tha-l passe my eyes. O may she fynd a sweeter calme in thos,
then I in thes, but when I hear she is aryved, (wch I coniure
you by all you ever loved, to lett me quickly know) I shall
inioy much peacc in the assurance, nothing shall be wanting wch
the best father can alow his best chyld. I please myself also in
the thought what comfort she will receive in that sweet little
company of brothers and sisters, all wch I hope will contribute
much to her speedy recovery, that I may have my deare Keate
agen. Meantime I will soe in teares that I may reape in joy.
   Your most affectionat sister,
   Win.
   Forgive also my late thancks for yr last dearly obliging
letter. Sweet brother, lett not Keat know my sadnis. I have
strangely dissembled itt, not to afflict her tender loving hart,
kynd to me as much beyound expression as desert. I shall no more
troble you with remembering me to all yours. This little
mesinger of love
<P 37>
will, I hope, make me knowne both to you and them.

<Q TIX 1670S? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 38>
[} [\LETTER LIII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Jan. 3.
   Hond. Deare Brother,
   What a strange mixture is this world of ioy and greife, or
rather what a weaknis, I, so quickly moved by either. My last to
you had more need of teares then incke. In this I know not how
enouf to speake my joys, that sweet Keat is well with you. See a
copius subiect for your prayers, and pitty; O lett them gaine
for me an equall love to God, in all his wills; my want of this
is iustly punished by Keat's absence, but I am confident God
will retorne that mercy to mee, and I hope quickly too, for I
believe the company of her brothers and sisters will help much
to her perfect recovery; for a little mallincolly was all the
fault she had, and certainely did her much hurt; and heer she
wanted divertisment, not haveing any of her owne age or
condition. I am ashamed she learnt so little, but her ill health
was so continuall, a hard
<P 39>
hart could not have sett her seriusly to any thing. I onely beg
you will quickly rite, and I will ceace to troble your eyes with
longer scribling. Yr hart, I know, kynd enouf to bear all my
defects, and kynder yet, if you beleeve my affection equalls the
reasons I fynd for itt. This supposed, I must needs stile my
self
   Your proud sister,
   Winefrid Thimelby.

<Q TIX 1670S? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 40>
[} [\LETTER LIV.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Jan. 28.
   Hond. Deare Brother,
   I had receaved most complet satisfaction in my sister's
letter, had I not perceaved your suspition that I wanted itt. O
God! how longe must I suffer? not being understood by you.
Truely, I am neither so blyndly proud in myselfe, not so uniust
to you, as to chalinge your letters, by the number of my owne,
no, I understand both too well, and set so due a value upon
yours, that, though I receave but won line for a letter, I
esteeme itt a ritch purchase; and shuld scruple to aske more as
worse then usury; to require juels for counterfeits. But its
lawful to receave a boundty, therfore when you please to give
it, I gladly take, as poor folckes use to doe, unconcerned to
give agayne, because
<P 41>
I have itt not. But thanckes and prayers shall ever waite upon
you, and the last knocke at heaven's gate tell we are both lett
in, wher my hopes perswade you will owne I ever was
   Your most affectionat, though unworthy, sister, Win.
   O what hopes of having my dear Keat againe? my want of
resignation deserves, I fear, this rod of separation.

<Q TIX 1670S? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 42>
[} [\LETTER LV.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT ASTON^]
(^Thes for Mr Herbert Aston, humbly present^) , Bellamore.
   Hond. Deare Brother,
   I am so revived with a poore little glimpse of hope wch my
brother Edward gives me of seeing our dear Keat againe, that
sylence growes too dull a thinge. I must proclame my ioys,
though 'twill discover much of my weaknis to be so esily
transported from won passion to a nother, when the bisinis is
onely this: My brother has promised he will goe a purpose to
Standel, to visit Keat; and if he can find she hath any frinds
that will contribute to the making of her hapy heer, he also
will offer his mite. O
<P 43>
that it wear possible he could speake with you. I doe not meane
for her, but his owne satisfaction; for I shuld not deserve your
pardon, had I a thought to begg of you, as beeing certaine you
are too good a father to her, too dear and kynd a brother to us,
too much a furtherer of good intentions, to need solicitation in
that behalfe, as far as yr ability will permit; further wear
most uniust for us to desire, and infinitly from the hart
   of your most affectionat sister,
   Win.

<Q TIX 1670S? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 44>
[} [\LETTER LVI.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Dearest -
   I never had more impatience in your silence (which is a great
expression) then in present circumstances; for I suffer much in
fear least our lov'd pride in Cottington will bee severely
humbled. For God-sake lett me know my part that I may act it
well. Naturally I am sure I shall, whither it bee ioy or greife.
Tell me, therfore, is she ... or has envie onely disguised her.
How faine wod I believe this last, and how hartely could I
forgive that crime. Na, how doe I wish it had been committed,
though I wear to undergoe the pennance dew to itt. Tell me
quickly, but largely, all the story. Doe not suppose me a well
mortifyed nun dead to the world; for alas tis not so, I am
alive, and as nearly concern'd for thos I
<P 45>
love, as if I had never left them, and must shar in all their
fortunes whither good or bad. For God-sake, what's become of my
dear brother Ned. I rite upon this subject to him, but never had
word of aunswer. Now hee's with you, I can easily forgive his
neglect of his poor sister, but tell him, at his retourne to
Cambray, his sylence will bee unpardonable. I know not what to
say to dear Cottington, for I beleeve ther is no corner left for
me in her loved memory; but when you meet good Mrs Collier, I
charge you say a great deal of kyndnis from me; for she expres'd
so much of dear respect and disinterested love for my poor
neece, that she left me much her debtor.
   Hapy Keat smiles at the world, and wonders ther can bee
varietie of concerns, she knowing but one which she follows
closs, always doeing ing what she shud doe; yet for all her
perfection,
<P 46>
the name of her brother John, or Bellamore, brings frech blood
into her cheeks, which witnesses she is alive still.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 48>
[} [\LETTER LVII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Sep. 8.
   Hond. and dearest Brother,
   Your letters are never in this world to be answerd. I referr
you therfore, till we meet in the Vale of Josaphat. Ther you'l
recive reward of all your unwearied charities, and unchangeable
kyndnis to a poor unworthy sister. Yet this comfort, your pietie
may reap from present circumstances; that, notwithstanding my
great stock of self love, which naturally inclines to sadnis, in
the neglect of frinds (now experienced in our once dear
Cottington). I find my self so chearish'd by your lov'd kyndnis,
and so filld up by it, thers no roome left for any repyning
thought. For it apears most unreasonable, to covett more from
any, when I cannot corispond in any visible maner, with half
that I receive from you. Therfore, as I intimated
<P 49>
before, I defereving accounts, till we meet in etternitie. I
must intreate you'l teache your girls the same patience, for
really I can never express myself what I am. But in pitty,
beleeve none lives that more loves you and yours, then your
poore sister,
   Win.
   Keat trusts me with her duty, and with reason, for sure I am,
none wod take more car it should not mischary; therfore receive
it whol, intire, and sound, for so she gave it me, as lykewyse
her love to all her brothers and sisters.

<Q TIX 1677 WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 50>
[} [\LETTER LVIII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   June 24, 77.
   Ever hond. dear Brother,
   I received by sister Gray an aunswer to those complaints I
whispered in your eare. Your kynd concern for myn in the neglect
of frinds was balsom to my wound; and, indeed, I am too
covetous, if I esteem not my self ritch inouf by your favours,
though all other frinds forgott me quite; but to doe them
iustis, I lately fynd it is not so. My neece Cottington has made
me full amends, by a long, and dearly kynd letter. My nephew
Aston 2 or 3, but of him I never was guilty of a ielous thought.
All of Bellamore may doe what they will, for tis impossible to
mistrust kyndnis ther.
   Dear Brother, give my thancks the advantage of yr presenting
them to worthy Mr Fitter, for his promiss concerning my dear Mrs
Fowler, who will have but too much need of his assistance. I
esteem her tryall by kyndnis
<P 51>
more dangerous to shake her resolution, then tortures would bee;
too hot sunshine, dus you know more harme to young groing
plants, than hard frosts; but I hope grace will overshadow her.
   What doe you meane wher you seeme to thinck my confidence in
you was shaken? Tis the darkest ridle I ever hard. I understand
nothing of itt; and I hugg my ignorance, and shuld hate any such
bould thought, as durst be so iniurious both to you and mee. Tis
more then time to thanck you for all your civilities to Sr Gray,
wch she tells me, wear both many and great, both att Bellamore
and St Tomas, wher you pleasd to visit her. I can retourne
nothing, because I cannot be more than I was
   Your affectionat sister,
   W. T.

<Q TIX 1670S? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 52>
[} [\LETTER LIX.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO MRS ELIZA
COTTINGTON^]
   (^These for Mrs Cottenton.^)
   Dear Neece,
   Presuming I heer incloss a large love letter, each word a
figure, to expresse how much itt is, I take the advantage to ad
my sifer as a compendius way to summ up my owne; for when you
have read all a kynd mother can say, I wod be understoode a
greater lover still of
<P 53>
you. These words seeme proud and high; but we ought not to blush
in the confession of truth, and that will answer for me, none
lives that more loves you, then
   Dear neece,
   Your affectionate ante,
   Winefrid Thimelby.
   Lett all the knott of our dear frinds receive my love. I wod
fayne know how sweet Gat dus. If you wod please to comaund
either my brother or hers to give me notis, I am sure thay wod
obaye.

<Q TIX 1670S? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 54>
[} [\LETTER LX.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO MRS ELIZA
COTTINGTON^]
   (^For yr dear self.^)
   Both dearly kynd and cruell Neece,
   You feast me so with choyce excesse of kyndnis, I am torn'd
epicure: upon your conscience bee itt. Every line of yours is
such a severall daynty dishe I can not feede on it without
glottony: God forgive you. You seeme to raigne as queene of
love, say, doe, what none els can; shoote arrows wher you
please, wound, and heale att once, whilest I, lyke som poore
slave, looke on, admire, receive your favours with blushes, and
with ioy. Burne in my hart with love, yet dar not speake of itt,
because tis naked, and can not apeare. It wants all yr
advantages of power to sett it forth: but glory not too much;
for ther is great complaynts of yr government. You violently
rob'd a preist of all the treasure of his love: he has not so
much
<P 55>
as a graine, to bestow upon his poore sister heer att Lovaine;
but kynd providence has given her better fortune in loves
trafick, then her brother (^bankerot^) ; for though she spent
att Lovaing as much as he could loose att London, she fynds itt
an unexhausted treasure, and if but wysely lay'd out, the
comings in inritch beyounde expression. Arithmatick cannot
coumpt the dear satisfactions which true worth renders to its
lovers. Thus you crowen the most sencire, constant, cordiall
love of
   Dearly kynd neece,
   Yr poor and infinitly oblig'd ante,
   W. Thimelby.
   My thancks can no wayes reach yr bounty. My debt so great
nothing but love can crosse the score.

<Q TIX 1670S? ECOTTINGTON>
<A ELIZA COTTINGTON>
<G F>
<P 56>
[} [\LETTER LXI.\] }] [^ELIZA COTTINGTON TO HERBERT ASTON^]
   Deare Uncle,
   After the good purposes, and strong resolutions, which I
think, if I can remember so long agoe, my last did expres, I
would by no meanes have you think it, all to gether the ould
neglegence; or what is worse, ill youmer: but that I have bine
so holy taken up with the gaity of the French, that I have not
time for so seriose imploiment as righting; this, perhaps, you
may think but a new excuse; but when you reflect that you wisht
it, you will not, I hope, repent if I am so conversed. I am only
sorry to hear no better newse of my country;
<P 57>
and I wish they had some of the good example which is hear: at
least Madame Lavalier is more then pretended; for she gos
through all the rigor of the order as much as any one. But there
is a lady in Queen-street, says, all ar not bound to be
Lavaliers. I must beg her pardon, if I think all that have done
like her aught, and that she can sattisfy no other way. I doe
not doubt but you will be of the same opinion. When shall I hear
your dear child is hapyly bestowed? That were something I should
reioyce at indeed; but she deserves so well, I must confes I
know no man worthy enouf. Had she
<P 58>
such a husband as father, it would be too much for this world,
therfore, while she hath you she can not be pittied by
   Your ever affectionat neece
   and servant,
   Eliz. Cottington.

<Q TIX 1670S? ECOTTINGTON>
<A ELIZA COTTINGTON>
<G F>
<P 59>
[} [\LETTER LXII.\] }] [^ELIZA COTTINGTON TO HERBERT ASTON^]
   Dearest Unkle,
   I hope now I may venter to say something for myself. If cosin
Gatt deseaves me not, I will not feer by this time but my pease
is chefly maid with you. Pardon the presumption, dear unkle, for
I owne my fault great; and have no other recourse so prevalent
in my opinion, (mistake me not all to geather) as yr
partiallity. For I remember once, you were not pleased at that
expression of me, so that I should be very unwilling to incur it
a second time. You must give me leave only to tell you, wher
ther is such true desert, as none doubts butt is ther, who
knowse her, you can not reward it better, then by a more than
ordinary kindnes; and it must not be calld a partiallity: that
being a contrary thing, a blindnes without any meritt often
times. But why doe I talk thus to unkle Aston, who knowse every
thing, and I nothing? I am
<P 60>
ashamed of my self, and will stop my pen to consider, if I can
find something that may give him a better satisfaction. But it
will not be, I can not thinck of so good a subiect as I have
begun with. To continue with Bellamore, you must know cousin
Aston is this day gone to a new play, which was never acted but
by the Lady Castlemaine. Wee ar in in expectation still of Mr
Draidens play. Ther is a bowld woman hath oferd one: my cosen
Aston can give you a better acount of her then I can. Some
verses I have seen which ar not ill: that is commendation enouf:
she will think so too, I believe, when it comes upon the stage.
I shall tremble for the poor wooman exposed among the critticks.
She stands need to be strongly fortified agenst them. The
greatest newse I can tell you, Lo. Buckhurst hath wright his
mistress a letter, wherin he shewse himself, what
<P 61>
she mought daly expect, inconstancy. She tooke it heavily for a
day; but thay say, is so well provided, as if she had bine the
occation of the change her selfe. Hary Jerman is the man. Wee
have so dull and so wicked a towne, as it will aford no newse
but of this kind, which will be so seriose to you. With such ill
expressions, I can not to soone end, when I have done my
greatest bisnes, which is to asure you, that none is more
   Your humble servant,
   Deare unkle,
   Ever to command,
   Eliz. Cottington.
   I can not but tell you, I think my self more bowld then the
wooman I have named, when I wright to you. For yr sensure is to
me what all is to her. Wonder not I doe it so seldom.

<Q TIX 1670S? ECOTTINGTON>
<A ELIZA COTTINGTON>
<G F>
<P 62>
[} [\LETTER LXIII.\] }] [^ELIZA COTTINGTON TO HERBERT ASTON^]
   Deare Unkle,
   Though I think you have resolved never to see this plase
more, methinks you should not quarell with all for one. Many
frends for one enemy should sattisfy, which I doubt not but you
have. But that which is above all, you inioy so much hapines in
the sweet solitude of Bellamour, that you despise all other
satisfactions, even King and no King, which is this day acted.
Maskerades, I know not what powre they might have with you, but
I know a gentleman of yr acquaintance, that, the first as ever I
was at, came and squeesd me by the hand; and I knew him not,
tell he discoverd him self: then I was obliged to say nothing.
For that trick, I am resolvd never to see any more, except it
were to meet you ther: and then I think it weare a very
convenient plase to discourse many things, too seriose for me to
<P 63>
wright. I am the less conserned that cosin Aston performes the
part of sending you the newse, when there is any. Nor have I
time for more, then my love to dear Gatt, with yr leave; and I
am yours.
   Eliz. Cottington.

<Q TIX 1670S? ECOTTINGTON>
<A ELIZA COTTINGTON>
<G F>
<P 64>
[} [\LETTER LXIV.\] }] [^ELIZA COTTINGTON TO HERBERT ASTON^]
   Deare Unkle,
   I doe asure you, though I preferd my health in the first
place, I look upon France to be no less advantagose, in all
other respects. But what is this to you, who inioys all that can
be, at your little Bellamour? Only, you can extend so far the
greatest charity, when you remember me at your so regular
devotions.
   As to my owne perticuler, some says hear, I am not in so much
danger, but I doubt it is all one: if so, I hope I shall have
your advise, what will be best to doe, for a poor banisht
creature, who is, in all conditions, more yours then you have
reason to believe. As you ar iust I will say no more, but that I
am
   Your most affectionat nece,
   to serve you,
   E. C.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 65>
[} [\LETTER LXV.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   (^Thes for Mr Herbert Aston.^)
   Hond. deare Brother,
   Sure you thincke me so hardned by affliction, that I have
lost both sence of ill, and tast of ioy, els you'd never keepe
me so short of comfort. You rite seldomer now then ever; though
I never wanted that satisfaction so much as now. Lett me
undeceive you, I am no stone: kyndnis is as living in my breast,
as full in power as ever: cloude yours no more with sylence:
wher love shynes with full beames grife disapeares. O hasten
that fayer day. Meane tyme Ile steale som glimes of comfort,
<P 66>
by remembering we are both walking towards each other, and
certaynely shall meet att last, sence every houre dispatches
part of our way: you know our harbenger went longe agoe, to
provide us a place. All things are ready, when when we are ready
for them; and every houre brings the good newes of our aproach
to death, that gate of lyfe. Forgive me, that I longe to fley
before you, sence I dar promise when you com, to give you place
before me, preheminence in all but love. But ther Ile boast I am
certaynely even, at least with you: na, my hopes give warent, I
shall be proclamed eternally,
   Yr most constant, most true,
   most affectionat sister,
   Winefrid Thimelby.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 67>
[} [\LETTER LXVI.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Hond. dear Brother,
   I longe to breake the flattering glasse your kyndnis thinckes
a true one. You still will looke upon me much better than I am.
Why will you sett me so hard a taske, allwayes to unpie what is
so finely wroaght? You tricke me netely up, but I must pull all
of, to pay truth what I owe. Know then, really I am infinittly
unworthy of the esteem, you too too favourably expresse every
way of me: for pitty put me no more to the confution of this
publick confession. My pride suffers much in itt, my kyndnis
more by thes sad delays in my sister's bisines; but this
unconstant world does so use us to perpetuall changes, that
methinckes, ther is no hope without fear, nor fear without hope.
O when, O when, shall ther be an end
<P 68>
of both, and I knowen what now I beg to be beleeved to bee,
   Your most affectionat sister,
   Win. Thimelby.
   Aprill 22.
   Dear Brother, take car that poore Gatt greave not. I am truly
glad she growes, and growes well too. How shuld I pitty her, had
she any other father. Teach her to mingle happines with me, for
betweene us we have all. She what I want in you, I what she
wants heer. Letts putt all in comon.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 69>
[} [\LETTER LXVII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Hond. dear Brother,
   My iust kyndnis, though a continuall springe ever flowing to
you, is lost in yours, as rivers in the sea. But know, though
itt appeare not, you receive itt in full streames, yet drowne
itt quit, in yr full tide of high and dear expressions; to which
I can make no answer, but must needs take leave to aske some
questions.
   What doe you meane in ye desyre you expresse ...? I suffer
strangely ly in the fear you may imagine I have power to ...;
wch really I have not. My power is onely payne. It brings no
liberty but restraint. The truth is, Keat gives so
<P 70>
great, so very great a satisfaction to all, that every one
desires more of the broode. If you suspect the least of my
indeavour to advance the bissines to my utmost power, you doe a
high iniustice to, and understand not one jott,
   Hond. dear brother,
   Yr most affectionat sister,
   and humble servant,
   Winfrid Thimelby.
   Dear Brother, say a very great deale for me to my hond. lady.
I am in all reallity, her most most affectionat, though
unprofitable servant.

<Q TIX 1680 WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 71>
[} [\LETTER LXVIII.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Aprill 30.
   Ever hond dear Brother,
   I had patience to fast all lent from the lov'd dayntys of yr
letters; but Easter brings an expectation of such feasts agen. I
therfor now bring in the first corce of an ordinary homly dish,
tis yr torne to bring the secound; upon which, my apetit is
wholly bent, as sure to relish every bitt and crome that falls
from that table of comfort. I suspect, mischariage of letters
has rob'd me of many a good bitt; for I evr found in you so kynd
a bounty towards my satisfaction, that sure I am, you wod have
ansured all you received from me; wch makes me conclud, divers
wer lost. One espetially, wherin I whisperd you concerning Gatt;
desyring you to lett me know, how her pulse beats towards
Lovaine; for my weaknis requires som warning. If I must for ever
loose her, tell me
<P 72>
by degrees, not all at once, least I be soone and more
inseparably wedded to greife, then she to a husband. Be sure she
read not this, but you, I know, will esyly forgive me. For,
though perhaps I am faulty by too immoderat desyres, yet still
my falt is not agaynst charity; for I love, and wish her as my
self. But as for faith and hope, I owne my selfe as weak in both
concerning her, as perfect in all three to you,
   Dearest Brother,
   W. T.
   My Lord Portland, I thinck, will be with you before midsomer;
but take no notis that I tell you so. He presents his humble
service, and desyres to know what hopes of a good fortune for
Mrs Weston. I doubt he will expect to know Gatts finall
resolution before his retorne. Keats eye mends: I hope she will
shortly rite herselfe, for the best I can say for her dus her
wronge.

<Q TIX 1680? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 73>
[} [\LETTER LXIX.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Ever hond. more then ever loved,
   I canot rite without reluctance, what I know you canot read
without troble. Our dearly dear Gatt wears still her crowen of
thornes, and with adition of sufferance, for she has got a
quartin ague; yet beares itt with so sweet a cherfullniss, and
her sister too, that to my shame I speake itt, I am the most
unresigned person of the 3. What a wretch am I, that knowing the
indispensible decree (even to the maker of the law), that none
shall enter Heaven by any other way, then sufferance, doe yet
repyne to meete the marke that tells us we goe right.
   Keate is resolved to keepe sylence, all she can obay yr last
comaund; and tell you her sisters head is well. Gatts excuse is
too largely tould. She can say nothing. I am left alone to tell
this sad story, and have sayd too much,
<P 74>
yet not enouf, till I style myselfe, beyound all expression, and
I fear beleefe,
   Yr most affectionat sister, 
   and humble servant,
   Winefrid Thimelby.
   Dear Brother, rite as oft as ever you can to Gatt, twill be
her best medisin.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 75>
[} [\LETTER LXX.\] }] [^WINEFRID THIMELBY TO GERTRUDE ASTON^]
   (^These for Mrs Gertrude Aston.^)
   My sweet Chyld,
   How couldst thou fynd in thy hart to give adition to my
troble, in parting with thee, and to be at such charges to vex
me? I beleeve you thought itt discretion, to temper one pation
by another; and therfore raysd my coller to moderate my greife;
but you fayl'd in your ayme, and left poore Keat, to bear alone
the scourge of my just anger. You have read how it goes with me,
tis now your torne to tell me how you doe. See you performe yr
taske clearly and largely: no general termes will serve my
torne. I must know all perticulers of yr indispositions, that I
may better know how to direct my prayers:
<P 76>
whether thancksgiving, or petition, suits you best. I have
allready past the hardest, I meane that of oblation, and shall
continue the second in a corner after matins, but the 3d I long
to have publicke in company of my good sisters. Tell us therfore
quickly, is your ague quit gon, that we may all give thancks to
God. How strangely doe I speake, as if health wear the proper
motive of gratitude, wheras certaynely patience in sicknis is
far above itt; and presuming one of thees, com what will, my
hart shall ever prayse God for thee: for I am confident yr lott
shall be made good, which you chose with Mrs Hacon. Remember it
well, but doe not mistake me. I meane not, presently to be a
nun. I mean not to seale thee up in a cloyster, (as for that,
his will be done, in spyt of fond desyres), but I meane to seale
thee up to his owne servise. Love God, and doe what thou wilt.
Ile promise to love thee every iot as well as if a nun: as
truely, as constantly, as dearly, because unchangebly thy most
affectionat ante,
   W. Thim.

<Q TIX 1673 WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 77>
[} [\LETTER LXXI.\] }] [^WINEFRID THIMELBY TO GERTRUDE ASTON^]
   Feb. 23, 1672.
   My dear sweet Chyld,
   I know not whither I shuld chyd or pitty thee, as being
ignorant of the cause of thy sylence. I am inclyned to fear,
thou art either sad or sick. The last may excuse thee, but the
first not at all. Na, if so, thou art most uniust, and keepe my
owne from me, and defrawdest me of my right. So I esteeme it, to
bear part in all thy concernes, espetially sufferance. Ther thou
shalt never be alone, by my consent. Therfor, dear chyld, tell
me truly and largely, how it goes with thy content; and, if I
may have leave to compare bace and meane things with high,
perhaps God deals with thee, as my mother did with me, when a
little foolish chyld, and nuely weaned from the brest. I gott a
trick to suck my thum, but she so rub'd it with worm wood, I
quickly left that sport. So I phansy,
<P 78>
Allty God sprinkels with bitternis all thy lov'd pleasures, and
will not have thee suck dry broken cesterns; but drinck full
draughts at the fountayne head of true and lasting ioys, such as
flow in religion. Forgive me, my chyld, I cannot forbear to say
this; my hart is so topfull of desyre to have thee as happy as
my self. But I wod not have thee take it for persuasion, unless
thou finde, as I suspect, no solid content wher thou art; but
supposing thou doest, I am truly satisfied, and will beleeve,
and hope, God will make thee a sayntt, wher thou art, and thats
all I car for. I never till now had ambition to be a prophetess.
   I must desyre yr prayers for dear Sr Mary Coyny, who dyed in
14 dayes sicknis: so frayle a flower is youth and beauty. Trust
not to itt Gatt, if thou beest wyse: but you know
<P 79>
who says, no matter how soone the fruit fall, so it hang till it
be ripe. Though her death was unexpected, yet she had the
excellent preparation of an Inocent, and virtuous lyfe. We have
hope next sumer, to see Mrs Weston, and Mrs Mary Hacon; and Keat
sais, you must make up that trinity of ioyes. But tis time to
present the kyndnis of yr frinds, lest I want roome. The first
place is our dear father's dew. None before him in tender love
for you, except my selfe. Next my lord, in his playne but
cordiall way. "Remember me to poore Gatt: wo'd she be a nun?
Faith, if she knew the world half so well as I, she wod make
haste out of itt. Dear Prokaty goes further, and further than I
can tell, in kynd expression. Yr misteris follows closs, in a
more sylent way, and wearys me with her oft kynd whispers, is
ther no hope of Gatts retorne, &c. Sister Clayton, Lame, King,
Musgrave, Constable, (^Marina^) , Clarke, Stafford,
<P 80>
Aurelia, Bessy Claye, all, and every one, nuns and sisters,
perticulerly poore Heicott, wod be named by som marke of
kyndnis; but our yong nun, sister Hacon, longs for a whisper;
and tells me, she repents som things she said to you, as fynding
it much otherwise then she thought. She is growen so constantly
mery, you wod scharce know her, but it strangely becoms her. She
longs for yr coming mitely, but says, I must have patience a
year or too; and then she dar almost swere by her owne
experience, you will know so much of the world, as to hate itts
deceats, and fly to saufty, wher she has alredy taken sanctuary.
I had almost forgott our 2 Novises, Nan Constable, and Franck
Tomson, who desyre you receive ther kyndnis. Mrs Mary
Worthington is scholer for order, all alone; but we expect
Crathornes sister. I have spent so much place in delivering
others kyndnis, that I must croud my owne to
<P 81>
my dearest brother Aston. In one word, I am all his, and thyne
as much; for I fynd no disbursment of love diminish my stocke.
Every one kindles, and mentaynes there owne fyre; and burne in
it, though never can consume, thy most affectionat ante,
   W. T.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 82>
[} [\LETTER LXXII.\] }] [^WINEFRID THIMELBY TO GERTRUDE ASTON^]
   (^For Dear Gatt.^)
   Sep. 20.
   My Dear sweet Chyld,
   Yr sylence, though never so long, could never have betrayed
your forgettfulnis of me, so much as yr letter did. Lord! know
you me no better, then to thinck I can have any change to thee,
or take any thing ill. No, no, my love is of a higher straine.
God, I hope, has ordered it to be eternal; therfor can receive
no diminution by any thing can hapen in this world. Now, to give
thee a true acoumpt why I rite so sildom, really tis partly to
spare thee. I meane to favour thy lasy umore, wch I know hates
riting, and yet wod suffer not to answer me. Partly also, I must
confesse, because I fynd it hard to speake to thee, and not to
speake the bottom of my hart; and that agayne might troble thee,
because our dissyres differ. I am
<P 83>
confind therfor to repeat, over and over againe the old story.
None ever did, or can love thee better, and (except thy father)
none so well as thy poore ante,
   W. Thimelby.
   I will not lett your sister rite for fear of putting her eyes
out of tune; because Sr Anne Gifford lyes a dying, and then you
know how many (\dirigis\) she is obliged to read, besydes the
psalter; but next tyme write to her, not to me. I shall take itt
full as well, for Keat and I are but one. No body knows of my
riting, els I shuld bee loaded with remembrances to you. Cosen
Crathorne is com back, and to be cloathed with Mall Worthington.

<Q TIX 1675? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 85>
[} [\LETTER LXXIII.\] }] [^WINEFRID THIMELBY TO GERTRUDE ASTON^]
   My dear dear Chyld,
   I have received both yr father's dear letter, and yours, of
the 12th of January: I confess, the best new years gift I ever
had; for thay brought ioy, equall to my former greife and care.
Yours a whole pack of comfort, pure wyne of gladnis: but yr
fathers had a mixture, a great deale of water with his wyne; and
twas fitt it shuld be so, els between you both, I had been
tipled quit. Sence yr letters came not tyme enouf for me to
answer both this weeke, your father, I am sure, will pardon me,
for making choyse of riting first to you, whom I so lattly
iniurd by loves impatiens; but I hope you received my (\mea
Culpa\) , wch I presently dispatched to you. For when yr father,
prophet lyke, admonished me of my sin, I presently cryed,
(\peccavi\) . Your sister's patience in yr sylence to her,
exacts the lyke in iustis from you; and,
<P 86>
alas! she has too much reason on her syde, for her eyes are not
yet well. Yet thinckes she sees to much in yr last to me. I
cannot excuse her. She is indeed too covetos. She fynds no
satiety in her owne hapines, because she lookes upon you as
wanting itt: this she will have me say from her. Now take my
owne sence. I car not wher thou livest, so thou livest right. I
make a shift to meete thee in a corner every night after
mattins; wher, though I can not speake with thee, I am allowed
to speake for thee, as much, and as longe as I will; and, if it
prove not so pleasing, yet I know tis more profitable: ther I
negotiat all thy affayers: ther Ile present all thy concernes:
ther Ile petition all thats good for thee. I cannot desemble,
but I have somthing of Keats weaknis, in resentment of thy
absence: but really I blame my weake hart for it; sence tis
certayne, that itt imports not wher, but how wee live. We are
too tender lovers. So we meet att our race's end, what matter
though we see not one another runne.
   Dear chyld, take this truth from me: Thy settlement in the
world will be no diminishion of my love, but onely augmentation
of my car
<P 87>
for thee, because there is more obiects to devide that love, wch
in one flame ought to ascend to God. Live freely in the world,
but garde thy hart from loving itt for thats forbid, because it
passeth. Cast not therfor away a portion of thy immortall soule
upon any thing transitory: fix all thy love on God, and then doe
what thou wilt, sweet chyld, for I am unchangeably thyn for
ever,
   W. T.

<Q TIX 1680? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 88>
[} [\LETTER LXXIV.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Sep. 3.
   Hond. dear Brother,
   Is it not preposterous to com with complaynts, wher in
justice I owe so many thancks? It wear so, if my complaynts wear
not of that nature, that they may pass as part of payment; but
they are of so good mettall, that, if tryd, thay will be found
pure and weighty gould. I apeale to your judgement for best
proufe; yet with this exception. Ile not alow you waye your
self, for ther your ballence is not even with myne, but with all
the rest of yr dear company, I will trust you. Waye then iustly,
what I must suffer for every one, when I know not how any one
has past so long, so dangerous a jornye. I, who have so much
love for all, that it seemes an undivided flame; and yett
agayne, so much perticuler love for every one, as if one onely
person wear sole heir of it. Waye, I say,
<P 89>
and redresse the greif, the care, and if you can, the love of 
   Dear Brother,
   Your most affectionat sister,
   W. Thimelby.
   Sweet Keats hart can take no change. She has all resentments
due, yet none of power to change her steady temper. She is hapy
in spyt of fate.

<Q TIX 1672 WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 90>
[} [\LETTER LXXV.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Septem. 2, 1672.
   Hond. deare Brother,
   Keat has received yours with all dutifull (that is
unexpressible) ioy; and kyndly flatters me into beleefe you'l
receive her answer, as willingly by my pen as her owne;
especially when I tell you, tis to spare her ill eyes, which
fynd too much imployment by the dutyes of order, in present
circumstances. Sr Anne Gifford lying a dying; wch brings an
obligation of reeding many prayers for her, both living and
dead. But poore Keat knowes not how ill a choyce she has made;
for I, that could never yet speak what was fitt for my self, how
is it possible I can doe it for her? But Ile trust your goodnis
will keepe my councill, and make good by yr kynd faith, whats
neither seen nor hard: beleeving
<P 91>
stedfastly she retornes all she shuld; and now methincks I have
hitt itt, and defye any can say more for her. Therfor, be so
obligingly kynd, as to aplye the same words to
   Yr most affectionat sister,
   W. Thimelby.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 92>
[} [\LETTER LXXVI.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   (^For Mr Herbert Aston, these humbly present^) , att
Bellamoore.
   Hon. deare Brother,
   Tis a kynd providence guides yr pen, equally dispensing
pleasure and profitt. Your letters feast me with delight, your
sylence proves a wholsom fast; humbling me by discovery of my
great selfe love. I used to flatter my selfe with beleeve, I had
so much reason, as to receave full satisfaction in my dear
sisters ioyes. But now I fynd self love is ravenous. Tis not a
sweet bit you carve from her table, can satiat a starved
stomake. I am not so erogant to lay clayme to desert, though as
you see almost impudent in begging yr favour. Thus I have sowed
<P 93>
my poore, little, black, contemptible seede, in hope of a
plentiful harvest of comfort. O deny it not for pity to
   Your most affectionat sister,
   though the most unworthy,
   Winefrid Thimelby.
Sep. 2.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 96>
[} [\LETTER LXXVIII.\] }] [^WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HER NEPHEWS AND
NIECES AT BELLAMOUR^]
   (^For Bellamor.^)
   My dear Children, Girls and Boys,
   Ever since my jubily, I have long'd for opportunity to convay
thes little things wear given me then; because I expect none so
fine agen. I hope you understand me well enough, to know, that
when I send you nothing, tis because I have nothing I thinck you
will car for; or els for want of opportunity. However, I have
one way of convaying kyndnis, which can never mischary; and
dayly make use of itt. Yet perhaps you will not receive it, till
the day of eternity. Then youl see my cares, my prayers, my neer
concerns for each of you. Gatt, I rejoice in thy health, and
ability to serve thy father, and assist thy brothers, and
sisters. Tis a hapines, I hope, dear Franck will share in
<P 97>
shortly. But I have some aprehension Franck, that thou wilt want
Doctor Conquest in the country. I will thanck him for the good
he has done thee: be sure thou leavest of greif for my good
lady. Thou must not bee such a stranger to heaven as to thinck
itts gaine, your losse. We have all indevored to speed her
flight to that b. eternity. God bless sweet Mall, Wat, and Hab,
and all of you. I forgot to tell thee Gatt, I never had that
letter yr father tells me you ritt; but Franck I had both of
yours, and sent a little purs, and christall, to thee, by one Mr
Digby; but I doubt he ner delivered it, tho he promised fare.
Now I send all together, agree among yourselves, as I know you
will: but what ever your father lyks best, know for certayne,
that is designed for him,
   From your most intirely loving aunt,
   W. T.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 98>
[} [\LETTER LXXIX.\] }] [^TO HER NIECES AND NEPHEWS IN
BELLAMOUR^]
   My dearly dear Children,
   Yr brother Jack tells me you kyndly thinck it long, since you
hard from me. I perceive ther has been miscariage of yr letters,
for certainely had I received any, I shuld have aunswered them;
though I confess, twas my design to wean both my self and you,
from that satisfaction: for now my age tells me, I have not long
to live; therfor my dear sweet chillderen, I wod have you
remember me, onely in your prayers. Ile doe the same by you: yet
if a letter com from you, I owne twill be a pleasant
distraction; and I will be sure to give you another: but this
will pass. Lett our constant labour bee, who shall runn swiftest
towards the happy eternity. For nothing in this world but may
advance our speed, if we know how to make right use of itt. As
long as your father
<P 99>
lives, I have no car for you. I am sure he is no less yr
spirituall father then yr naturall. I praye God, you may hould
him fast. But alas! you must att last, you must, when God calls,
lett him goe. Be sure, therfor, to make benefitt of the time
mercy indulges him to you; and pray I may not out live yr
happinis in him, for being totally unable to give you any
comfort my self, twod prove an unsufferable cross, to your poor,
but most affectionat aunt,
   W. T.
   When you rit, be sure to tell me perticulers of each of you,
for really my love is so perticuler to every one, boys and
girls, that a generall accoumpt serves not my turne. When you
see worthy Mr Morgan, give him my best respects, though I shall
never clearly forgive his forsaking Lovaing: tell him, ould dear
father lives now, I thinck, onely to give us a pattern how to
dye. He is so weake, not able to goe one stepp, nor scarce to
speake to be understood by any, but thos that are continually
about him. Yet so cherful in the expectation of death, that he
even vexes me to see him so long to leave us. Tother day,
hearing him sigh,
<P 100>
I demaunded the cause. He tould me he long'd to dye. I answerde,
he was about itt. He replyed, O may itt bee this day, this hour,
this moment. His teares mayd out the rest. You may be sure he
wept not alone. We dayly expect his death, wch will bee his ioy,
but unspeakable grife to your poor affectionat aunt,
   W. T.

<Q TIX 1680? WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 101>
[} [\LETTER LXXX.\] }] [^WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HER NIECES^]
   For my dear Girls,
My dear sweet girls you must not think your sister Keat is dead,
though my ioys bee so. She truly lives, and shall never dy. She
laughs at our fond tears, for God has wyp'd her eyes. Wonder not
that I speak so confidently, for all
<P 102>
that saw her virtues, (which is every one in the house) thinks
what I say. This last half year God was pleased to try her with
much infirmity and great paines, especially in her head; in that
extremitie, that somtimes she could not speak; but she had made
a bargan with me, that when she held up her fingar, I must torn
to God for her, with a (\fiat voluntas tua\) . Just the night
before God took her from me, she had been discoursing with one
of our sisters, who lamented the misery of humaine frailty, that
drags us somtimes to doe or say, what wee know to be amiss. No,
sed she, say not so, tis too true, that we often frayly doe
amiss, but I cannot belive that any will doe ill, when they
perceive itt so. When this was told our father, he aunsered, she
measured others by herself, for she never did. Ile say no more,
least I coole yr devotion in praying for her, and we must
remember, our judgments fall infinitly short of allmightie Gods,
in whose sight the very stars are not pure.
   I am your too much affectionat aunt,
   W. T.

<Q TIX 1670S WTHIMELBY>
<A WINEFRID THIMELBY>
<G F>
<P 103>
[} [\LETTER LXXXI.\] }] [^FROM WINEFRID THIMELBY TO HERBERT
ASTON^]
   Hond. dear Brother,
   I will not measure you, by my owne weake hart; you understand
better the kings high
<P 104>
way, and know crosses are blessings, and markes that we go
right. Therfore I feare not to tell you, our dear sister, to tye
up our ioys in due limitts, broke her owne, and went, I dout
not, towards the liberty of saynts. Upon the 24th of last munth,
she fell sick, and after 9 days
<P 105>
began to recover, as we hopet; but fell back into a relapse,
which toke her from us. Rype and ready for heaven, she fell to
ryse for ever. My eyes and hart are full, receave the overflow.
   Your most affectionat sister,
   W. T.
   July 26.





